The Project Gutenberg eBook of Historical Record of the Thirty-fourth, or
the Cumberland Regiment of Foot : containing an account of the formation of
the regiment in 1702 and of its subsequent services to 1844, by Richard
Cannon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Historical Record of the Thirty-fourth, or the Cumberland
       Regiment of Foot : containing an account of the formation of the
       regiment in 1702 and of its subsequent services to 1844

Author: Richard Cannon

Release Date: October 3, 2021 [eBook #66459]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Brian Coe, John Campbell and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust Digital
             Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE
THIRTY-FOURTH, OR THE CUMBERLAND REGIMENT OF FOOT : CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT
OF THE FORMATION OF THE REGIMENT IN 1702 AND OF ITS SUBSEQUENT SERVICES TO
1844 ***




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

  Footnote anchors are denoted by [number], and the footnotes have been
  placed at the end of each major section.

  The tables in this book are best viewed using a monospace font.

  A superscript is denoted by ^x or ^{xx}, for example S^t or Esq^{re}.

  Some minor changes to the text are noted at the end of the book.




[Illustration:

  BY COMMAND OF His late Majesty WILLIAM THE IV^{TH}.
  _and under the Patronage of_
  Her Majesty the Queen.

  HISTORICAL RECORDS,
  _OF THE_
  British Army

  _Comprising the_
  _History of every Regiment_
  _IN HER MAJESTY’S SERVICE_.

  _By Richard Cannon Esq^{re}._

  _Adjutant General’s Office, Horse Guards._
  London.
  _Printed by Authority._]




  HISTORICAL RECORD

  OF

  THE THIRTY-FOURTH,

  OR,

  THE CUMBERLAND REGIMENT

  OF

  FOOT:

  CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT OF

  THE FORMATION OF THE REGIMENT
  IN 1702,

  AND OF

  ITS SUBSEQUENT SERVICES
  TO 1844.

  _ILLUSTRATED WITH PLATES._

  LONDON:
  PARKER, FURNIVALL, AND PARKER,
  _MILITARY LIBRARY, WHITEHALL_.

  M.DCCC.XLIV.




  LONDON:
  HARRISON AND CO., PRINTERS,
  ST. MARTIN’S LANE.




GENERAL ORDERS.


  _HORSE-GUARDS_,
  _1st January, 1836_.

His Majesty has been pleased to command that, with the view of
doing the fullest justice to Regiments, as well as to Individuals
who have distinguished themselves by their Bravery in Action with
the Enemy, an Account of the Services of every Regiment in the
British Army shall be published under the superintendence and
direction of the Adjutant-General; and that this Account shall
contain the following particulars, viz.:--

  ---- The Period and Circumstances of the Original Formation of
  the Regiment; The Stations at which it has been from time to time
  employed; The Battles, Sieges, and other Military Operations
  in which it has been engaged, particularly specifying any
  Achievement it may have performed, and the Colours, Trophies,
  &c., it may have captured from the Enemy.

  ---- The Names of the Officers, and the number of
  Non-Commissioned Officers and Privates Killed or Wounded by the
  Enemy, specifying the place and Date of the Action.

  ---- The Names of those Officers who, in consideration of their
  Gallant Services and Meritorious Conduct in Engagements with the
  Enemy, have been distinguished with Titles, Medals, or other
  Marks of His Majesty’s gracious favour.

  ---- The Names of all such Officers, Non-Commissioned Officers,
  and Privates, as may have specially signalized themselves in
  Action.

  And,

  ---- The Badges and Devices which the Regiment may have been
  permitted to bear, and the Causes on account of which such Badges
  or Devices, or any other Marks of Distinction, have been granted.

  By Command of the Right Honorable
  GENERAL LORD HILL,
  _Commanding-in-Chief_.

  JOHN MACDONALD,
  _Adjutant-General_.




PREFACE.


The character and credit of the British Army must chiefly depend
upon the zeal and ardour by which all who enter into its service
are animated, and consequently it is of the highest importance that
any measure calculated to excite the spirit of emulation, by which
alone great and gallant actions are achieved, should be adopted.

Nothing can more fully tend to the accomplishment of this desirable
object than a full display of the noble deeds with which the
Military History of our country abounds. To hold forth these bright
examples to the imitation of the youthful soldier, and thus to
incite him to emulate the meritorious conduct of those who have
preceded him in their honorable career, are among the motives that
have given rise to the present publication.

The operations of the British Troops are, indeed, announced in the
“London Gazette,” from whence they are transferred into the public
prints: the achievements of our armies are thus made known at the
time of their occurrence, and receive the tribute of praise and
admiration to which they are entitled. On extraordinary occasions,
the Houses of Parliament have been in the habit of conferring on
the Commanders, and the Officers and Troops acting under their
orders, expressions of approbation and of thanks for their skill
and bravery; and these testimonials, confirmed by the high honour
of their Sovereign’s approbation, constitute the reward which the
soldier most highly prizes.

It has not, however, until late years, been the practice (which
appears to have long prevailed in some of the Continental armies)
for British Regiments to keep regular records of their services
and achievements. Hence some difficulty has been experienced in
obtaining, particularly from the old Regiments, an authentic
account of their origin and subsequent services.

This defect will now be remedied, in consequence of His Majesty
having been pleased to command that every Regiment shall, in
future, keep a full and ample record of its services at home and
abroad.

From the materials thus collected, the country will henceforth
derive information as to the difficulties and privations which
chequer the career of those who embrace the military profession. In
Great Britain, where so large a number of persons are devoted to
the active concerns of agriculture, manufactures, and commerce, and
where these pursuits have, for so long a period, being undisturbed
by the _presence of war_, which few other countries have escaped,
comparatively little is known of the vicissitudes of active service
and of the casualties of climate, to which, even during peace, the
British Troops are exposed in every part of the globe, with little
or no interval of repose.

In their tranquil enjoyment of the blessings which the country
derives from the industry and the enterprise of the agriculturist
and the trader, its happy inhabitants may be supposed not often to
reflect on the perilous duties of the soldier and the sailor,--on
their sufferings,--and on the sacrifice of valuable life, by which
so many national benefits are obtained and preserved.

The conduct of the British Troops, their valour, and endurance,
have shone conspicuously under great and trying difficulties; and
their character has been established in Continental warfare by the
irresistible spirit with which they have effected debarkations in
spite of the most formidable opposition, and by the gallantry and
steadiness with which they have maintained their advantages against
superior numbers.

In the official Reports made by the respective Commanders, ample
justice has generally been done to the gallant exertions of the
Corps employed; but the details of their services and of acts of
individual bravery can only be fully given in the Annals of the
various Regiments.

These Records are now preparing for publication, under his
Majesty’s special authority, by Mr. RICHARD CANNON, Principal Clerk
of the Adjutant General’s Office; and while the perusal of them
cannot fail to be useful and interesting to military men of every
rank, it is considered that they will also afford entertainment and
information to the general reader, particularly to those who may
have served in the Army, or who have relatives in the Service.

There exists in the breasts of most of those who have served, or
are serving, in the Army, an _Esprit de Corps_--an attachment
to everything belonging to their Regiment; to such persons a
narrative of the services of their own Corps cannot fail to prove
interesting. Authentic accounts of the actions of the great, the
valiant, the loyal, have always been of paramount interest with
a brave and civilized people. Great Britain has produced a race
of heroes who, in moments of danger and terror, have stood “firm
as the rocks of their native shore:” and when half the world has
been arrayed against them, they have fought the battles of their
Country with unshaken fortitude. It is presumed that a record of
achievements in war,--victories so complete and surprising, gained
by our countrymen, our brothers, our fellow citizens in arms,--a
record which revives the memory of the brave, and brings their
gallant deeds before us,--will certainly prove acceptable to the
public.

Biographical Memoirs of the Colonels and other distinguished
Officers will be introduced in the Records of their respective
Regiments, and the Honorary Distinctions which have, from time to
time, been conferred upon each Regiment, as testifying the value
and importance of its services, will be faithfully set forth.

As a convenient mode of Publication, the Record of each Regiment
will be printed in a distinct number, so that when the whole shall
be completed, the Parts may be bound up in numerical succession.




INTRODUCTION

TO

THE INFANTRY.


The natives of Britain have, at all periods, been celebrated for
innate courage and unshaken firmness, and the national superiority
of the British troops over those of other countries has been
evinced in the midst of the most imminent perils. History contains
so many proofs of extraordinary acts of bravery, that no doubts can
be raised upon the facts which are recorded. It must therefore be
admitted, that the distinguishing feature of the British soldier is
INTREPIDITY. This quality was evinced by the inhabitants of England
when their country was invaded by Julius Cæsar with a Roman army,
on which occasion the undaunted Britons rushed into the sea to
attack the Roman soldiers as they descended from their ships; and,
although their discipline and arms were inferior to those of their
adversaries, yet their fierce and dauntless bearing intimidated
the flower of the Roman troops, including Cæsar’s favourite tenth
legion. Their arms consisted of spears, short swords, and other
weapons of rude construction. They had chariots, to the axles of
which were fastened sharp pieces of iron resembling scythe-blades,
and infantry in long chariots resembling waggons, who alighted
and fought on foot, and for change of ground, pursuit or retreat,
sprang into the chariot and drove off with the speed of cavalry.
These inventions were, however, unavailing against Cæsar’s
legions: in the course of time a military system, with discipline
and subordination, was introduced, and British courage, being
thus regulated, was exerted to the greatest advantage; a full
development of the national character followed, and it shone forth
in all its native brilliancy.

The military force of the Anglo-Saxons consisted principally of
infantry: Thanes, and other men of property, however, fought on
horseback. The infantry were of two classes, heavy and light. The
former carried large shields armed with spikes, long broad swords
and spears; and the latter were armed with swords or spears only.
They had also men armed with clubs, others with battle-axes and
javelins.

The feudal troops established by William the Conqueror consisted
(as already stated in the Introduction to the Cavalry) almost
entirely of horse; but when the warlike barons and knights, with
their trains of tenants and vassals, took the field, a proportion
of men appeared on foot, and, although these were of inferior
degree, they proved stout-hearted Britons of stanch fidelity. When
stipendiary troops were employed, infantry always constituted a
considerable portion of the military force; and this _arme_ has
since acquired, in every quarter of the globe, a celebrity never
exceeded by the armies of any nation at any period.

The weapons carried by the infantry, during the several reigns
succeeding the Conquest, were bows and arrows, half-pikes, lances,
halberds, various kinds of battle-axes, swords, and daggers. Armour
was worn on the head and body, and in course of time the practice
became general for military men to be so completely cased in steel,
that it was almost impossible to slay them.

The introduction of the use of gunpowder in the destructive
purposes of war, in the early part of the fourteenth
century, produced a change in the arms and equipment of the
infantry-soldier. Bows and arrows gave place to various kinds of
fire-arms, but British archers continued formidable adversaries;
and, owing to the inconvenient construction and imperfect bore of
the fire-arms when first introduced, a body of men, well trained
in the use of the bow from their youth, was considered a valuable
acquisition to every army, even as late as the sixteenth century.

During a great part of the reign of Queen Elizabeth each company
of infantry usually consisted of men armed five different ways; in
every hundred men forty were “_men-at-arms_,” and sixty “_shot_;”
the “men-at-arms” were ten halberdiers, or battle-axe men, and
thirty pikemen; and the “shot” were twenty archers, twenty
musketeers, and twenty harquebusiers, and each man carried, besides
his principal weapon, a sword and dagger.

Companies of infantry varied at this period in numbers from 150
to 300 men; each company had a colour or ensign, and the mode of
formation recommended by an English military writer (Sir John
Smithe) in 1590 was:--the colour in the centre of the company
guarded by the halberdiers; the pikemen in equal proportions, on
each flank of the halberdiers: half the musketeers on each flank
of the pikes; half the archers on each flank of the musketeers,
and the harquebusiers (whose arms were much lighter than the
muskets then in use) in equal proportions on each flank of the
company for skirmishing.[1] It was customary to unite a number
of companies into one body, called a REGIMENT, which frequently
amounted to three thousand men: but each company continued to carry
a colour. Numerous improvements were eventually introduced in the
construction of fire-arms, and, it having been found impossible to
make armour proof against the muskets then in use (which carried
a very heavy ball) without its being too weighty for the soldier,
armour was gradually laid aside by the infantry in the seventeenth
century: bows and arrows also fell into disuse, and the infantry
were reduced to two classes, viz.: _musketeers_, armed with
matchlock muskets, swords, and daggers; and _pikemen_, armed with
pikes from fourteen to eighteen feet long, and swords.

In the early part of the seventeenth century Gustavus Adolphus,
King of Sweden, reduced the strength of regiments to 1000 men. He
caused the gunpowder, which had heretofore been carried in flasks,
or in small wooden bandoliers, each containing a charge, to be
made up into cartridges, and carried in pouches; and he formed
each regiment into two wings of musketeers, and a centre division
of pikemen. He also adopted the practice of forming four regiments
into a brigade; and the number of colours was afterwards reduced to
three in each regiment. He formed his columns so compactly that his
infantry could resist the charge of the celebrated Polish horsemen
and Austrian cuirassiers; and his armies became the admiration of
other nations. His mode of formation was copied by the English,
French, and other European states; but so great was the prejudice
in favour of ancient customs, that all his improvements were not
adopted until near a century afterwards.

In 1664 King Charles II. raised a corps for sea-service, styled
the Admiral’s regiment. In 1678 each company of 100 men usually
consisted of 30 pikemen, 60 musketeers, and 10 men armed with light
firelocks. In this year the King added a company of men armed with
hand grenades to each of the old British regiments, which was
designated the “grenadier company.” Daggers were so contrived as to
fit in the muzzles of the muskets, and bayonets similar to those
at present in use were adopted about twenty years afterwards.

An Ordnance regiment was raised in 1685, by order of King James
II., to guard the artillery, and was designated the Royal Fusiliers
(now 7th Foot). This corps, and the companies of grenadiers, did
not carry pikes.

King William III. incorporated the Admiral’s regiment in the second
Foot Guards, and raised two Marine regiments for sea-service.
During the war in this reign, each company of infantry (excepting
the fusiliers and grenadiers) consisted of 14 pikemen and 46
musketeers; the captains carried pikes; lieutenants, partisans;
ensigns, half-pikes; and serjeants, halberds. After the peace in
1697 the Marine regiments were disbanded, but were again formed on
the breaking out of the war in 1702.[2]

During the reign of Queen Anne the pikes were laid aside, and every
infantry soldier was armed with a musket, bayonet, and sword; the
grenadiers ceased, about the same period, to carry hand grenades;
and the regiments were directed to lay aside their third colour:
the corps of Royal Artillery was first added to the Army in this
reign.

About the year 1745, the men of the battalion companies of infantry
ceased to carry swords; during the reign of George II. light
companies were added to infantry regiments; and in 1764 a Board of
General Officers recommended that the grenadiers should lay aside
their swords, as that weapon had never been used during the Seven
Years’ War. Since that period the arms of the infantry soldier have
been limited to the musket and bayonet.

The arms and equipment of the British Troops have seldom differed
materially, since the Conquest, from those of other European
states; and in some respects the arming has, at certain periods,
been allowed to be inferior to that of the nations with whom they
have had to contend; yet, under this disadvantage, the bravery and
superiority of the British infantry have been evinced on very many
and most trying occasions, and splendid victories have been gained
over very superior numbers.

Great Britain has produced a race of lion-like champions who have
dared to confront a host of foes, and have proved themselves
valiant with any arms. At _Crecy_, King Edward III., at the head
of about 30,000 men, defeated, on the 26th of August, 1346, Philip
King of France, whose army is said to have amounted to 100,000
men; here British valour encountered veterans of renown:--the
King of Bohemia, the King of Majorca, and many princes and nobles
were slain, and the French army was routed and cut to pieces. Ten
years afterwards, Edward Prince of Wales, who was designated the
Black Prince, defeated, at _Poictiers_, with 14,000 men, a French
army of 60,000 horse, besides infantry, and took John I., King of
France, and his son Philip, prisoners. On the 25th of October,
1415, King Henry V., with an array of about 13,000 men, although
greatly exhausted by marches, privations, and sickness, defeated,
at _Agincourt_, the Constable of France, at the head of the flower
of the French nobility and an army said to amount to 60,000 men,
and gained a complete victory.

During the seventy years’ war between the United Provinces of the
Netherlands and the Spanish monarchy, which commenced in 1578 and
terminated in 1648, the British infantry in the service of the
States-General were celebrated for their unconquerable spirit and
firmness;[3] and in the thirty years’ war between the Protestant
Princes and the Emperor of Germany, the British Troop in the
service of Sweden and other states were celebrated for deeds of
heroism.[4] In the wars of Queen Anne, the fame of the British
army under the great MARLBOROUGH was spread throughout the world;
and if we glance at the achievements performed within the memory
of persons now living, there is abundant proof that the Britons
of the present age are not inferior to their ancestors in the
qualities which constitute good soldiers. Witness the deeds of
the brave men, of whom there are many now surviving, who fought in
Egypt in 1801, under the brave Abercromby, and compelled the French
army, which had been vainly styled _Invincible_, to evacuate that
country; also the services of the gallant Troops during the arduous
campaigns in the Peninsula, under the immortal WELLINGTON; and
the determined stand made by the British Army at Waterloo, where
Napoleon Bonaparte, who had long been the inveterate enemy of Great
Britain, and had sought and planned her destruction by every means
he could devise, was compelled to leave his vanquished legions to
their fate, and to place himself at the disposal of the British
Government. These achievements, with others of recent dates in the
distant climes of India, prove that the same valour and constancy
which glowed in the breasts of the heroes of Crecy, Poictiers,
Agincourt, Blenheim, and Ramilies, continue to animate the Britons
of the nineteenth century.

The British Soldier is distinguished for a robust and muscular
frame,--intrepidity which no danger can appal,--unconquerable
spirit and resolution,--patience in fatigue and privation, and
cheerful obedience to his superiors. These qualities, united with
an excellent system of order and discipline to regulate and give
a skilful direction to the energies and adventurous spirit of
the hero, and a wise selection of officers of superior talent to
command, whose presence inspires confidence,--have been the leading
causes of the splendid victories gained by the British arms.[5]
The fame of the deeds of the past and present generations in the
various battle fields where the robust sons of Albion have fought
and conquered, surrounds the British arms with a halo of glory;
these achievements will live in the page of history to the end of
time.

The records of the several regiments will be found to contain a
detail of facts of an interesting character, connected with the
hardships, sufferings, and gallant exploits of British soldiers in
the various parts of the world, where the calls of their Country
and the commands of their Sovereign have required them to proceed
in the execution of their duty, whether in active continental
operations, or in maintaining colonial territories in distant and
unfavourable climes.

The superiority of the British infantry has been pre-eminently set
forth in the wars of six centuries, and admitted by the greatest
commanders which Europe has produced. The formations and movements
of this _arme_, as at present practised, while they are adapted
to every species of warfare, and to all probable situations
and circumstances of service, are calculated to show forth the
brilliancy of military tactics calculated upon mathematical and
scientific principles. Although the movements and evolutions have
been copied from the continental armies, yet various improvements
have from time to time been introduced, to insure that simplicity
and celerity by which the superiority of the national military
character is maintained. The rank and influence which Great Britain
has attained among the nations of the world, have in a great
measure been purchased by the valour of the Army, and to persons
who have the welfare of their country at heart, the records of the
several regiments cannot fail to prove interesting.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] A company of 200 men would appear thus:--

                                 __|
                                |  |
                                |__|
                                   |
       20     20     20     30    2|0     30     20     20     20
                                   |
  Harquebuses.    Muskets.      Halberds.      Muskets.    Harquebuses.
           Archers.       Pikes.         Pikes.       Archers.

The musket carried a ball which weighed 1/10th of a pound; and the
harquebus a ball which weighed 1/25th of a pound.

[2] The 30th, 31st, and 32nd Regiments were formed as Marine corps
in 1702, and were employed as such during the wars in the reign
of Queen Anne. The Marine corps were embarked in the Fleet under
Admiral Sir George Rooke, and were at the taking or Gibraltar, and
in its subsequent defence in 1704; they were afterwards employed at
the siege of Barcelona in 1705.

[3] The brave Sir Roger Williams, in his Discourse on War, printed
in 1590 observes:--“I persuade myself ten thousand of our nation
would beat thirty thousand of theirs (the Spaniards) out of the
field, let them be chosen where they list.” Yet at this time the
Spanish infantry was allowed to be the best disciplined in Europe.
For instances of valour displayed by British Infantry during the
Seventy Years’ War, see the Historical Record of the Third Foot, or
Buffs.

[4] _Vide_ the Historical Record of the First, or Royal Regiment of
Foot.

[5] “Under the blessing of Divine Providence, His Majesty ascribes
the successes which have attended the exertions of his troops in
Egypt to that determined bravery which is inherent in Britons; but
His Majesty desires it may be most solemnly and forcibly impressed
on the consideration of every port of the army, that it has been a
strict observance of order, discipline, and military system, which
has given the full energy to the native valour of the troops, and
hue enabled them proudly to assert the superiority of the national
military character, in situations uncommonly arduous, and under
circumstances of peculiar difficulty.”--_General Orders in 1801._

In the General Orders issued by Lieut.-General Sir John Hope
(afterwards Lord Hopetoun), congratulating the army upon the
successful result of the Battle of Corunna, on the 16th of January,
1809, it is stated:--“On no occasion has the undaunted valour of
British troops ever been more manifest. At the termination of a
severe and harassing march, rendered necessary by the superiority
which the enemy had acquired, and which had materially impaired
the efficiency of the troops, many disadvantages were to be
encountered. These have all been surmounted by the conduct of the
troops themselves; and the enemy has been taught, that whatever
advantages of position or of numbers he may possess, there is
inherent in the British officers and soldiers a bravery that knows
not how to yield,--that no circumstance can appal,--and that will
ensure victory, when it is to be obtained by the exertion of any
human means.”


[Illustration: THIRTY-FOURTH (THE CUMBERLAND) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

(Regimental Colour.)

(_To face page 101._)]


  THE THIRTY-FOURTH,

  OR

  THE CUMBERLAND

  REGIMENT OF FOOT,

  BEARS ON ITS REGIMENTAL COLOUR THE WORDS

  “ALBUHERA”--“VITTORIA”--“PYRENEES”--“NIVELLE”--“NIVE”--“ORTHES”--“PENINSULA,”

  TO COMMEMORATE ITS DISTINGUISHED SERVICES IN THE PENINSULA
  AND SOUTH OF FRANCE,

  FROM 1809 TO 1814.




CONTENTS.


  Year                                                          Page

  1702  Formation of the Regiment                                  9

  ----  Names of Officers                                         10

  1705  Forms part of the Force under the Earl of Peterborough,
          and embarks for Spain                                   11

  ----  Siege of Barcelona                                        --

  1707  Returns to England                                        15

  1708  Proceeds to Ostend                                        16

  ----  ---- Antwerp                                              17

  1710  Sieges of the Fortresses of Douay, Bethune, Aire,
          and St. Venant                                          18

  1711  Siege of Bouchain                                         19

  1712  Stationed at Dunkirk                                      --

  1713  Returns to England                                        20

  ----  Reduction of the Regiment                                 --

  1715  Restoration of the Regiment                               --

  ----  Names of Officers                                         --

  1717  Proceeds to Ireland                                       21

  1719  Returns to England                                        --

  ----  Forms part of the expedition under General
          Viscount Cobham, destined for Spain                     --

  ----  Capture of Vigo                                           --

  ----  Returns to England, and is again stationed in
          Ireland                                                 22

  1727  Embarks for Gibraltar                                     --

  1728  Returns to Ireland                                        23

  1739  Augmentation of the Establishment                         --

  1739  Removed to England                                        --

  1744  Embarks for Flanders                                      24

  1745  Battle of Fontenoy                                        --

  ----  Returns to England                                        25

  1746  Proceeds to Edinburgh                                     26

  ----  Battle of Culloden                                        27

  ----  Stationed in South Britain                                28

  1749  The Regiment placed on a peace establishment              --

  1751  Uniform and Colours of the Regiment                       --

  1752  Embarks for Minorca                                       29

  1756  Embarks for Gibraltar                                     32

  ----  Returns to England                                        --

  1757  The Regiment augmented to two battalions                  --

  1758  The Second Battalion constituted the Seventy-third
          Regiment                                                --

  ----  Forms part of an armament employed to reduce the
          maritime power of France, and after destroying the
          shipping and magazines at St. Maloes, returns
          to England                                              --

  ----  Forms part of a similar expedition, and after taking
          possession of Cherbourg, returns to England             33

  1762  Siege of the Moro Fort, and Capture of the Havannah       35

  1763  Proceeds to North America                                 36

  1768  Returns to Europe                                         --

  1769  }
  1776  } Stationed in Ireland                                    --

  1775  Augmented to the War Establishment                        --

  1776  Embarks for North America                                 37

  1777  Siege of Fort Stanwix                                     39

  1782  Styled the _Cumberland Regiment_                          --

  1786  Returns to England                                        --

  1792  Augmentation of the Establishment                         --

  1795  Embarks for the West Indies                               --

  ----  Proceeds to St. Lucia                                     40

  1796  Reduction of St. Vincent                                  41

  ----  Embarks for England                                       --

  1800  ---- ---- the Cape of Good Hope                           42

  1802  ---- ---- the East Indies                                 --

  1803  Four Companies proceed from Madras to Ceylon              43

  1805  A Second Battalion added                                  --

  ----  The Detachment of the First Battalion rejoins
          Head-Quarters from Ceylon                               44

  1807  The Second Battalion proceeds to Ireland                  --

  ----  Embarks for England                                       --

  1809  The Second Battalion embarks for the Peninsula            45

  1810  Battle of Busaco                                          47

  1811  Siege of Badajoz                                          48

  ----  Battle of Albuhera                                        49

  ----  Action at Arroyo de Molinos                               51

  1812  Siege of Ciudad Rodrigo                                   53

  1813  Battle of Vittoria                                        55

  ----  Blockade of Pampeluna                                     56

  ----  Battle of the Pyrenees                                    60

  ----  ---- ---- Nivelle                                         61

  ----  ---- ---- Nive                                            --

  1814  ---- ---- Orthes                                          62

  ----  ---- ---- Toulouse                                        --

  ----  The Second Battalion embarks for Ireland                  63

  1817  ---- ---- ---- disbanded                                  64

  1817  }
   to   } Mahratta and Pindaree war                               66
  1820  }

  1823  Embarks for England                                       70

  1824  Proceeds to Ireland                                       --

  1829  Embarks for North America                                 71

  1836  The red and white tuft resumed                            72

  1841  Embarks for England                                       76

  1843  Proceeds to Ireland                                       77

  1844  The Conclusion                                            78




SUCCESSION OF COLONELS.

  Year                                                          Page

  1702  Robert Lord Lucas                                         79

  1705  Hans Hamilton                                             80

  1712  Thomas Chudleigh                                          --

  1723  Robert Hayes                                              81

  1732  Stephen Cornwallis                                        --

  1738  Lord James Cavendish                                      --

  1742  The Honorable James Cholmondeley                          82

  1749  The Honorable Henry Seymour Conway                        83

  1751  Charles Russell                                           --

  1754  Thomas Earl of Effingham                                  84

  1760  Lord Frederick Cavendish                                  --

  1797  George Ferdinand Lord Southampton                         --

  1810  Sir Eyre Coote, G.C.B.                                    85

  1816  The Honorable Sir G. Lowry Cole, G.C.B.                   87

  1826  Sir Thomas Makdougall Brisbane, Bart. G.C.B.
          and G.C.H.                                              88


  Succession of Lieutenant-Colonels                               89

  Succession of Majors                                            91


PLATES.

  Regimental colour                             _to face page_   xix

  Queen’s and Regimental Colours                       ”           9

  Uniform of Officers in 1844                          ”           9

  Uniform of Private Soldiers in 1742                  ”          24

  Uniform of Private Soldiers in 1844                  ”          78


[Illustration: THIRTY-FOURTH (THE CUMBERLAND) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

(Queen’s and Regimental Colours.)

(_To face page 1._)]


[Illustration: THIRTY-FOURTH (THE CUMBERLAND) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

(Uniform of Officers in 1844.)

(_To face page 1._)]




HISTORICAL RECORD

OF THE

THIRTY-FOURTH,

OR

THE CUMBERLAND REGIMENT

OF

FOOT.


[Sidenote: 1702]

At the commencement of the eighteenth century, the British monarch
witnessed his efforts to curb the ambition of Louis XIV., and
to preserve the balance of power in Europe, counteracted by the
virtual union of two powerful states, under a dynasty distinguished
for its thirst for conquest, the King of France having procured the
accession of his grandson, Philip, Duke of Anjou, to the throne of
Spain. Existing treaties were thus openly violated; at the same
time the liberties of Europe were invaded by the seizure of the
Spanish Netherlands, by the troops of France, and the detention
of the Dutch garrisons in the barrier towns; and war was resolved
upon. A considerable augmentation was made to the British army, and
the THIRTY-FOURTH REGIMENT OF FOOT is one of the corps embodied on
this occasion. Its first colonel was ROBERT LORD LUCAS, from the
lieutenant-colonelcy of Sir John Jacob’s Regiment, now Thirteenth
Light Infantry, his commission bearing date the 12th of February,
1702.

This regiment was composed of men from Norfolk, Essex, and the
adjoining counties, and was raised under the authority of warrants
from King William III., by Colonel Lord Lucas, Lieutenant-Colonel
Thomas Dare, Major Garth, Captains Kitson, Edward Shadwell, E.
Parsons, P. Lechire, ---- Pardon, Richard Steele, and Robert
Cecill, who each raised a company; and when the numbers were nearly
complete, the establishment was augmented to twelve companies, of
three officers and sixty-six non-commissioned officers and soldiers
each: one wing of the regiment had its rendezvous at Colchester,
and the other at Norwich.

While the regiment was completing its ranks, the death of King
William III., and the accession of Queen Anne, occurred on the 8th
of March, 1702, and the soldiers took the oath of allegiance to Her
Majesty.

An expedition being fitted out against Cadiz, under the Duke of
Ormond, LORD LUCAS’S Regiment was ordered to send five companies to
Landguard Fort, Sheerness, and Tilbury, early in May, to relieve
the Buffs, who were ordered to embark on board of frigates for the
Isle of Wight, to join the expedition to Spain; at the same time
seven companies of LORD LUCAS’S Regiment were ordered to relieve a
detachment of the Foot Guards on duty at the Tower of London, of
which fortress his Lordship was lieutenant-governor; two companies
were afterwards detached to Dover Castle.

On the return of the expedition from Spain, the regiment was
relieved from duty at the out-stations, and was quartered in the
Tower, from whence it detached three hundred men to the West
Indies, to complete Colonel Columbine’s Regiment, now Sixth Foot,
which was ordered to proceed to that station. After the departure
of this detachment, the regiment proceeded, in December, into Essex
to recruit, the head-quarters being established at Chelmsford.

[Sidenote: 1703]

[Sidenote: 1704]

The ranks of the regiment were speedily completed, and in the
spring of 1703 it marched to Hull, Berwick, and Carlisle; where it
was stationed in the following year.

[Sidenote: 1705]

On the 31st of January, 1705, Colonel Lord Lucas died; and was
succeeded in the colonelcy of the regiment by Lieutenant-Colonel
Hans Hamilton, from the Earl of Derby’s Regiment, now the Sixteenth
Foot.

Meanwhile, the war which commenced on the frontiers of the
Netherlands, in 1702, had taken a wider range, and Italy,
Germany, Portugal, and Spain, had become the theatre of conflict;
and in May, the regiment embarked on board the fleet under Sir
Cloudesly Shovel, with other forces commanded by General the Earl
of Peterborough, either to aid the Duke of Savoy in driving the
French out of Italy, to make an attempt on Naples and Sicily, or
to effect a landing on the coast of Spain, as should appear most
for the interest of Her Majesty’s service. The fleet arrived at
Lisbon in June, and additional forces were put on board; Archduke
Charles, who was acknowledged as King of Spain, also embarked, and
an attempt on the coast of Catalonia was resolved upon. From Lisbon
the armament sailed, on the 28th of July, for Gibraltar, where a
reinforcement joined from the garrison, and Colonel Hans Hamilton,
of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, was nominated quartermaster-general
of the expedition.

Leaving Gibraltar, the fleet proceeded to the Bay of Altea, in
Valencia, and a number of Catalonians and Valencians throwing
off their allegiance to the House of Bourbon, and acknowledging
Archduke Charles as king of Spain, the British general was induced
to undertake the siege of _Barcelona_, the capital of Catalonia,
which was defended by upwards of five thousand men, under the
viceroy of Catalonia, Don Francis Velasco. In 1697, this fortress
resisted thirty thousand French troops eight weeks, and cost Louis
XIV. twelve thousand men; but the Earl of Peterborough was unable
to bring more than seven thousand men into the lines, which gave
an interesting character to the enterprise.

Landing near the river Bassoz, on the 23rd and 24th of August, the
troops advanced towards the town, and after some difficulties were
overcome, the siege was commenced. The native energy of British
soldiers was conspicuously displayed on this occasion, and the
grenadiers of the THIRTY-FOURTH had the honor to take part in
storming the detached fortress of _Montjuich_, situate on a hill
on the west side of the town. The troops engaged on this service
made a detour through the mountains during the night of the 13th of
September, and stormed the outworks early on the following morning,
making a lodgment, gaining the bulwark of a new fortification, and
establishing themselves in the works. In a few days afterwards the
garrison surrendered.

This success facilitated the siege of the city of Barcelona, in
which the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment took an active part. The armed
Catalonian and Valencian peasantry blocked up the avenues of the
town; seamen were landed from the fleet to take part in the siege;
the soldiers were incessant in their exertions; cannon and mortars
were dragged up steep precipices by men; and a practicable breach
being effected, a detachment of the regiment was in readiness to
take part in storming the town; but the garrison surrendered,
and saved the effusion of blood which would have attended this
enterprise. A number of armed countrymen entered the city through
the breach, to plunder the partisans of the house of Bourbon; but
the Earl of Peterborough entered the town at the head of a troop
of dragoons, and the grenadiers of the THIRTY-FOURTH, and other
regiments, put a stop to the plundering, and rescued the governor
and his garrison from the vengeance of the people.

The capture of Barcelona produced great astonishment throughout
Europe, and the splendour of the achievement augmented the
reputation of the British arms.

This success was followed by the submission of all the province of
Catalonia, and part of that of Valencia; and after a short stay at
Barcelona, the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment was selected to form part of
the garrison of the ancient town of Tortosa, situated in a pleasant
fertile country, on the left bank of the Ebro, near its influx into
the sea. At this town, which was called Dordosa by the Romans,
and received municipal privileges from Scipio, the regiment was
stationed some time: its services are consequently not immediately
connected with the exploits of the Earl of Peterborough in Valencia.

[Sidenote: 1706]

As the operations of the British troops became extended, the
regiment quitted its pleasant quarters at Tortosa, and was employed
in several movements in the early part of 1706.

King Charles and his counsellors did not make efforts to provide
for the defence of the towns which had been gained, nor to obtain
the means for future conquests; but spent their time and money in
diversions: the breaches of _Barcelona_ and Montjuich were not
repaired, and the garrison was unprovided for a siege. King Philip
pursued a different line of conduct; he collected forces from
various quarters, and assembled a numerous army, with a powerful
artillery, for the re-capture of the provinces he had lost, and
a formidable French and Spanish force approached the capital of
Catalonia by land; at the same time a French fleet appeared before
the city. The garrison being weak in numbers, corps were hurried
from various places to increase its strength; and the THIRTY-FOURTH
Regiment travelled one hundred and twenty miles on mules, on the
30th and 31st of March, and on the 1st of April mounted guard on
the works. The regiment had not been two hours on duty when the
French approached the place, and made an attack on the outworks
of fort Montjuich; but were repulsed by a hundred men of the
THIRTY-FOURTH, in gallant style[6]. To the timely arrival of the
regiment may be attributed, in a great measure, the preservation of
the town: the soldiers repaired the breaches, and made a desperate
and resolute defence.

King Charles remained in Barcelona; his presence stimulated
the garrison to extraordinary efforts, and British valour was
conspicuously displayed in his cause; but the troops were not
sufficiently numerous for the defence of so extensive a place. When
the garrison, bravely struggling against multiplied difficulties,
had become exhausted; its numbers decreased by deaths, wounds, and
sickness to about a thousand men, and a practical breach was ready
for the enemy to attack the place by storm, the combined English
and Dutch fleets approached with reinforcements; the French naval
force hurried from before the town, and the garrison was relieved.
Losing all hope of final success, and having had five thousand men
killed and wounded before the town, the enemy made a precipitate
retreat on the 12th of May, leaving two hundred brass cannon,
thirty mortars, and immense stores of ammunition and provision,
together with the sick and wounded of their army, behind them,
and hurrying to France, they thus left the allies at liberty to
engage in new enterprises. Barcelona was thus preserved by British
skill and valour; and the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment received, with the
other corps in garrison, the thanks of King Charles for its heroic
conduct. Its numbers were considerably reduced by casualties during
the siege.

An immediate advance on Madrid was resolved upon; and the allied
army on the frontiers of Portugal was requested to penetrate boldly
to the capital of Spain. The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment embarked
for Valencia to join in this enterprise; and, after landing, it
furnished a number of select men towards completing the Earl of
Peterborough’s Regiment of Dragoons, which was embodied on this
occasion. The advance to Madrid was delayed; pernicious councils,
which paid more attention to court formalities than to military
operations, retarded the journey of King Charles. This gave time
for the French forces to re-enter Spain, and for the arrival of
additional troops to reinforce the enemy; and the allied army,
after advancing to Madrid, was obliged to retreat to Valencia and
Murcia.

[Sidenote: 1707]

After passing the winter in Spain, the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment,
being much reduced in numbers, was directed to transfer its private
soldiers fit for duty to other corps, in the spring of 1707, and to
return to England to recruit. This took place before the army took
the field; and while the officers and non-commissioned officers
were waiting for transports, the battle of Almanza was fought,
on the 25th of April, when the enemy gained a decisive victory.
The embarkation was afterwards delayed a short period; but in the
autumn the regiment arrived in England, and commenced recruiting
its ranks, in which it had great success.

[Sidenote: 1708]

The regiment was stationed in the south of England in the spring
of 1708, when the King of France fitted out a fleet, and embarked
troops, for the invasion of Scotland, in favour of the Pretender.
On this occasion the regiment had so far recruited its numbers, and
become efficient, that it was selected to proceed to the north,
to confront the invaders; but it was ordered to halt at Leeds, in
consequence of the French shipping having been chased from the
British shores by the English fleet.

Having defeated the enemy’s designs of invading the United Kingdom,
the British Government fitted out an armament against the French
coast, and the THIRTY-FOURTH Foot were ordered to return from
Yorkshire to take part in the enterprise. They proceeded to the
Isle of Wight, where they were reviewed by Major-General Erle,
on the 19th of July, and afterwards embarked on board the fleet,
under Admiral Sir George Byng. The expedition approached the
coast of France in the early part of August, and after menacing
several places, a landing was effected to create alarm, and make
a diversion in favour of the allied army in Flanders. The troops
subsequently returned on board the fleet, and, after menacing
the coast at several points, withdrew towards England. Orders
were afterwards received to proceed to Ostend, where the several
regiments arrived on the 21st of September; when a body of French
troops, under Count de la Motte, who was advancing to surprise
the town, made a precipitate retreat towards Bruges, cutting
the dikes to lay the country between Ostend and Nieuport under
water. Major-General Erle landed with the THIRTY-FOURTH and other
regiments, and taking post at the village of Leffinghen, formed an
intrenched position.

At this period the allied army in the Netherlands was engaged in
the siege of the important fortress of _Lisle_, and ammunition
becoming scarce, the Duke of Marlborough sent seven hundred
waggons, under a strong guard, to Ostend, for a supply.
Major-General Erle had drained the inundations, built a bridge over
the canal at Leffinghen, and opened a communication with the army,
towards which the waggons laden with stores began their march on
the 26th of September; and the guard having repulsed the forces
under Count de la Motte, at Wynendale, the convoy arrived safe at
its destination, and the army was enabled to continue the siege.

The French commanders resolved to cut off the communication of
the allied army with Ostend, and the Duke of Vendosme proceeded
to Oudenburg with thirty thousand men, established posts along
the canal between Plassendale and Nieuport, cut the dikes in
several places, and laid a great extent of country under water.
The THIRTY-FOURTH and other regiments, under Major-General
Erle, pitched their tents on the high grounds of Raversein,
and the Duke of Marlborough put the covering army in motion;
when the Duke of Vendosme made a precipitate retreat, and the
THIRTY-FOURTH Foot took part in forwarding a supply of ammunition
across the inundations in boats. The Duke of Vendosme detached
a body of troops to besiege Leffinghen, which was taken after a
sharp resistance. He also menaced the camp at Raversein, when
Major-General Erle retreated to the outworks of Ostend.

A numerous body of the enemy marching to Brabant, under the Elector
of Bavaria, the THIRTY-FOURTH, and four other regiments, embarked
from Ostend, under Brigadier-General Wynne, for Antwerp, where
they were stationed when the citadel of Lisle surrendered, and the
campaign was terminated by the re-capture of Ghent and Bruges.

[Sidenote: 1709]

The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, being composed of young soldiers, was
employed on garrison duty during the year 1709.

[Sidenote: 1710]

In April, 1710, the regiment quitted its quarters, and traversed
the country towards the frontiers of France, to serve the
campaign of that year with the army under the celebrated Duke of
Marlborough. The regiment was engaged in the operations by which
the French lines were passed at _Pont-a-Vendin_, and it afterwards
took part in the siege of the strong fortress of _Douay_, where it
had repeated opportunities of distinguishing itself. This fortress
was defended by a numerous garrison, under General Albergotti, an
officer of reputation, who made a determined resistance; and the
soldiers of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment were fully employed on duty
in the trenches, carrying on the approaches, repulsing the sallies
of the garrison, and storming the outworks, which occasioned
considerable loss. The French army advanced to raise the siege, but
did not hazard a general engagement; and Douay surrendered on the
27th of June. The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment had one subaltern, six
serjeants, and seventy-five rank and file killed; two captains,
three subalterns, five serjeants, and one hundred and twenty rank
and file wounded, during the siege[7].

After the capture of this fortress, the regiment joined the main
army, which was encamped at Villers-Brulin during the siege of
_Bethune_, which fortress was reduced before the end of August. The
regiment was subsequently employed in covering the sieges of _Aire_
and _St. Venant_, both of which fortresses were captured before the
end of the campaign.

[Sidenote: 1711]

Quitting its winter quarters among the Walloon peasantry, in April,
1711, the regiment joined the army, and was reviewed, at the camp
at Warde, on the 8th of June, by the Duke of Marlborough. It was
formed in brigade with the Tenth, Twenty-first, and Wynne’s
(afterwards disbanded) Regiment, under Brigadier-General Hamilton,
and took part in the movements by which the enemy’s formidable
lines were passed at _Arleux_, on which occasion the superiority of
the English general’s tactics was particularly conspicuous.

This splendid success was followed by the siege of the town of
_Bouchain_, situated on both sides of the river Scheldt, and the
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment had the honor to take an active share in the
operations against this fortress, which was taken by capitulation
in the middle of September. When the damaged works at Bouchain were
repaired, the regiment went into winter quarters.

[Sidenote: 1712]

Early in April, 1712, the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment took the field,
and joined the army under the command of the Duke of Ormond, who
penetrated the French territory to the frontiers of Picardy,
encamping at Cateau-Cambresis, while the Germans undertook the
siege of _Quesnoy_. In the mean time the French monarch had
solicited peace, and had agreed to deliver the city of Dunkirk into
the hands of the British sovereign, as a pledge of his sincerity. A
suspension of arms was proclaimed between the British and French,
and the army under the Duke of Ormond withdrew to Ghent. On the 4th
of August the regiment was detached from the camp near Ghent, with
several other corps, under Lieutenant-General the Earl of Orkney,
to Dunkirk, where it was stationed some time.

On the 30th of November, 1712, Queen Anne conferred the colonelcy
of the regiment on Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Chudleigh,
from Brigadier-General Durell’s regiment, in succession to
Brigadier-General Hamilton, who, on the death of Brigadier-General
Durell, in December following, was nominated colonel of his
corps,--the Sixteenth Foot.

[Sidenote: 1713]

At the conclusion of the peace of Utrecht, the regiment was
withdrawn from Dunkirk, and proceeded to Great Britain. At this
period a considerable reduction took place in the numbers of the
regular army, and all the corps raised after the peace of Ryswick,
in 1697, were directed to be taken off the establishment, except
two, viz., the Twenty-eighth and Twenty-ninth Regiments of Foot.
This reduction included the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, which was
accordingly reduced, and the officers placed upon half-pay.

[Sidenote: 1714]

[Sidenote: 1715]

The decease of Queen Anne, and the accession of King George I.,
on the 1st of August, 1714, was followed by a short period of
tranquillity; but in 1715 the partisans of the Pretender made
efforts to procure his accession to the throne, and commotions
occurred in England; at the same time the nation was threatened
with invasion from abroad. The King augmented the army, and
warrants were issued for the restoration of the THIRTY-FOURTH and
several other regiments of foot, in the summer of this year.

Names of the officers appointed to the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, at
its restoration in the summer of 1715:--

  _Colonel_, THOMAS CHUDLEIGH.
  _Lieutenant-Colonel_, THOMAS WHITNEY.
  _Major_, CHARLES DOUGLAS.

  _Captains._
  Robert Hayes[8]
  Samuel Daniels
  Richard Doige
  Michael Moore
  Francis Mutys
  Henry Skelton
  Richard Pyott

  _Lieutenants._
  -- Saubergues
  Walter Yard
  Edward Cooksey
  -- Brereton
  William Hamilton
  John Tremaigne
  Thomas Batten
  Christopher Philips
  Timothy White
  William Hayes
  Thomas Ford

  _Ensigns._
  Henry Sirck
  Roger Sterne
  John Sutton
  John Spaddy
  Thomas Kitson
  Thomas Parker
  Thomas Price
  John Brushfield
  William Wickham

[Sidenote: 1716]

Soon afterwards the standard of the Pretender was raised in
Scotland, by the Earl of Mar; but the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment was
retained in England; and the rebellion was suppressed in the early
part of 1716, by the troops under the Duke of Argyle.

[Sidenote: 1717]

In 1717, the regiment received orders to proceed to Ireland, to
relieve one of the corps ordered to be disbanded in that country.

[Sidenote: 1718]

[Sidenote: 1719]

The regiment remained in Ireland until the early part of 1719,
when the preparations made by the King of Spain to forward the
interests of the Pretender, occasioned it to be withdrawn from that
country; and it was subsequently encamped in the Isle of Wight,
and held in readiness for active service. The British Government
projected the capture of Corunna, in Biscay, and of Peru, in
South America; and the THIRTY-FOURTH sailed in the early part of
September with the expedition, under General Viscount Cobham, for
the attack of the former place; but on arriving off the coast of
Gallicia, circumstances occurred which occasioned an attack on
_Vigo_ to be resolved upon. The fleet entered the harbour of Vigo
on the 29th of September, seized on seven Spanish ships, and on
the following day the troops landed under the fire of musketry
from the mountains. Advancing towards the town, the British forced
the Spaniards to abandon Vigo and Fort St. Sebastian, which were
taken possession of by eight hundred men, under Brigadier-General
Honeywood. A battery being opened against the citadel, the garrison
was soon induced to surrender, giving up two thousand barrels
of powder, eight thousand muskets, and fifteen pieces of brass
artillery, which had been prepared for the invasion of Britain in
favour of the Pretender. While the siege of the castle of Vigo was
in progress, _Rondondella_ was captured by a detachment from the
army; and on the 12th of October a thousand men proceeded, under
Major-General Wade, against _Pont-a-Vedra_, from whence thirteen
companies of Spaniards fled in a panic; the town, arsenal, barracks
for two thousand men, thirteen pieces of brass and eighty-six of
iron ordnance, five thousand small arms, three hundred barrels
of powder, and a great quantity of other stores, were captured.
The arsenal, barracks, and Fort Marine, were destroyed; the iron
ordnance and the more valuable stores were removed on board the
fleet.

Finding himself oppressed on every side, and his resources
exhausted, the King of Spain made pacific overtures; and a
treaty of peace was concluded before the expedition to Peru was
undertaken. The armament returned to England, and the THIRTY-FOURTH
were again stationed in Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1723]

On the 18th of February, 1723, Lieutenant-Colonel Robert Hayes,
from the command of a company in the First Foot Guards, was
appointed colonel of the regiment, by purchase, in succession to
Colonel Chudleigh, who retired.

[Sidenote: 1726]

Few years elapsed before the Spanish monarch again violated the
peace of Europe. The possessions, of which he was deprived by the
peace of Utrecht, in 1713, had been relinquished with reluctance,
and towards the end of 1726, he assembled an army in Andalusia,
under the command of the Count de la Torres, to make a determined
effort for the re-capture of _Gibraltar_.

[Sidenote: 1727]

In February, 1727, the garrison of Gibraltar opened its fire on the
besieging army; and the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment was, at this period,
on its way from Ireland, to share in the honor of a successful
defence of this important fortress. The regiment encountered
a storm at sea, and lost several companies by shipwreck; six
companies proceeded to Plymouth, and afterwards continuing their
voyage, arrived at Gibraltar on the 26th of March, in company with
the Twenty-fifth Regiment; they were followed by several other
corps. The garrison made a very gallant defence of the fortress
committed to their charge, against the storm of war, which raged
against them with increasing fury until the thunder of one hundred
cannon became almost incessant in the day time, and was partially
continued throughout the night. The tremendous fire of the
Spaniards produced little effect beyond the bursting of many of
their own cannon, and rendering others useless; and many thousands
of the besieging army perished in the attempt. In the early part
of June, the fire slackened; on the 18th of that month hostilities
ceased; and the fortress of Gibraltar continued to form one of the
trophies of British prowess.

[Sidenote: 1728]

Peace having been concluded with Spain, the regiment was withdrawn
from Gibraltar, and proceeded to Ireland, where it was conspicuous
for its good conduct in quarters.

[Sidenote: 1731]

[Sidenote: 1732]

Colonel Robert Hayes died at Jamaica, on the 7th of April, 1731,
and the colonelcy of the regiment remained vacant until the 8th
of January 1732, when King George II. conferred the appointment
on Lieutenant-Colonel Stephen Cornwallis, from the command of a
company in the Foot Guards.

[Sidenote: 1738]

Colonel Cornwallis commanded the regiment until 1738, when
he was removed to the Eleventh Foot, and was succeeded by
Lieutenant-Colonel Lord James Cavendish.

[Sidenote: 1739]

On the commencement of the war with Spain, in 1739, the
establishment of the regiment was augmented, and in the autumn it
was removed to England.

[Sidenote: 1740]

In 1740, a detachment of the regiment served on board the fleet, as
marines.

[Sidenote: 1741]

[Sidenote: 1742]

Colonel Lord James Cavendish died in November, 1741, and in
1742 the colonelcy of the regiment was conferred on Colonel
the Honorable James Cholmondeley, from the Fifty-ninth, now
Forty-eighth Regiment.

[Sidenote: 1743]

[Sidenote: 1744]

During the summer of this year a British army proceeded to
Flanders, to support the house of Austria, against the united
efforts of the King of France and the Elector of Bavaria, who were
endeavouring to deprive the Archduchess, Maria Theresa, of her
hereditary dominions. In 1743, a victory was gained at Dettingen;
and in the summer of 1744, the allied army confronted the forces of
France in the Austrian Netherlands.

In June, 1744, the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment embarked for Flanders,
and joining the allied army at the camp on the bank of the Scheldt,
took part in several operations. It penetrated the territory
subject to France to the vicinity of Lisle; and subsequently
returned to Flanders, where it passed the winter.

[Sidenote: 1745]

The French monarch assembled a numerous army in the spring of
1745, and commenced operations by besieging the strong fortress of
Tournay; and the Duke of Cumberland, having arrived in Flanders,
assembled the allied army with the view of raising the siege. The
THIRTY-FOURTH were called from their quarters in April, to take
part in this service; and when the allied army approached, the
French took up a position at the village of _Fontenoy_.

[Illustration: THIRTY-FOURTH (THE CUMBERLAND) REGIMENT OF FOOT. M
DCC XLII.

(Uniform of Private Soldiers in 1742)

(_To face page 24._)]

At an early hour on the morning of the 11th of May, the allied
army advanced to engage the enemy, and the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment
entered the plain in front of the French batteries, to take part
in the action. Soon after nine o’clock, the British infantry
moved forward to attack the French position on the right of the
village of Fontenoy, and their gallant bearing, in the face of a
storm of grape and musketry, excited admiration; by a resolute
charge they broke the French lines; but the Dutch failed in their
attack, and the British regiments were forced to retire. A second
attack was made, and the heroic valour of the English infantry
was conspicuous; their steady fire destroyed entire ranks of
their enemy, and the determined charge with the bayonet proved
irresistible; but the Dutch again failed, and a retreat was
ordered. The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment evinced great gallantry on this
occasion, and it had the honor of performing a conspicuous part in
covering the retreat, and in bringing up the rear of the right wing
out of the plain, to the village of Vezont. The determined bearing
of the regiment, with that of the Thirty-second Foot, and the
brigade of Life Guards under Major-General the Earl of Crawford,
intimidated the enemy, and the retreat was effected, without
serious loss, to the town of Aeth.

The regiment had one serjeant and seventeen rank and file killed;
Lieutenants Cramer, Forrest, Mure, Courtenay, and Hargraves,
Ensigns Donallen and Stacey, two serjeants, and fifty-three rank
and file wounded; one serjeant and twenty-seven rank and file
missing.

The regiment was afterwards encamped on the plains of Lessines; and
was subsequently employed in operations of a defensive character;
but the enemy had so great a superiority of numbers, that it was
found impossible to prevent the loss of several fortified towns.

In the mean time, Charles Edward, eldest son of the Pretender,
had arrived in Scotland, and being joined by the Highland clans,
he resolved to make a desperate effort to overthrow the existing
government. The THIRTY-FOURTH regiment was ordered to return to
England on this occasion; it left the camp at Vilvorde on the 13th
of September, embarked at Williamstadt, on the 19th, and arriving
in the river Thames on the 23rd, landed at Blackwall, from whence
it was ordered to proceed to Newcastle, where a body of troops was
assembling under Field-Marshal Wade. Having joined this force, the
regiment was formed in brigade with the Buffs, the Thirteenth, and
Forty-eighth Regiments, and when the clans penetrated England,
it marched by Durham, Darlington, and Richmond, in order to
cover Yorkshire, and eventually proceeded to Ferrybridge, where
it arrived on the 8th of December. When the Highlanders quitted
Derby, and made a precipitate retreat to Scotland, the regiment was
engaged in the attempt to intercept their return; but the clans
escaped with the loss of a few men killed in a skirmish on Clifton
moor.

[Sidenote: 1746]

Early in January, 1746, the regiment marched to Edinburgh, from
whence it advanced, with the troops under Lieutenant-General
Hawley, to _Falkirk_, for the purpose of forcing the insurgents to
raise the siege of Stirling castle.

The clans quitted Stirling, and on the 17th of January, they
advanced to Falkirk moor; when the King’s troops marched to
attack the insurgents. As the royal army diverged upon the moor,
a storm was seen approaching, and as the soldiers moved forward
to commence the battle, a violent hurricane, with a heavy shower
of rain, beat violently in their faces, and nearly blinded them;
at the same time, it beat on the backs of the Highlanders and
caused them little annoyance. The engagement commenced under great
disadvantages to the King’s troops, who could not see to take aim;
more than half the muskets would not give fire, and the powder
became wet and useless while the men were in the act of loading.

Being thus blinded and confounded by the storm, several regiments
faced about and retreated. Others stood firm and repulsed the
clans; but during the night the whole retired. The regiment lost
its commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Powell, who was mortally
wounded on this occasion. Its colonel, Brigadier-General the
Honorable James Cholmondeley, highly distinguished himself.

The troops in Scotland were reinforced: his Royal Highness the Duke
of Cumberland assumed the command, and on the 31st of January they
again advanced; when the Pretender raised the siege of Stirling
castle, and made a precipitate retreat. The THIRTY-FOURTH were
engaged in the pursuit of the clans to Perth, where the army halted
in consequence of the severe weather, until the 20th of February,
when the march was resumed, and in the beginning of the following
month the army arrived at Aberdeen, where its progress was retarded
by heavy rains and snow storms. In the early part of April, the
King’s troops were again in motion towards Inverness, and on the
16th of that month, they discovered the clans in order of battle on
_Culloden moor_, when they formed line opposite the hostile ranks;
the THIRTY-FOURTH, or Cholmondeley’s[9], five hundred men, being
in the right wing of the front line, and on the left of the second
battalion of the Royal regiment.

The action commenced between twelve and one o’clock, and in less
than one hour the rebel army was overpowered and chased from
the moor with great slaughter. This victory was decisive, and
it instantly transformed the young Pretender from an imaginary
monarch to a humble fugitive; an interval of hardship and suffering
followed, and after wandering for some time in disguise, among the
isles and mountains, he escaped to France.

The loss of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment at the battle of
Culloden[10] was limited to three private soldiers. After returning
from the pursuit of the clans, the regiment was encamped a short
time near Inverness, and it was subsequently employed in escorting
prisoners towards South Britain. The rebellion being finally
suppressed, the services of the THIRTY-FOURTH were no longer
required in Scotland, and they were stationed in England.

[Sidenote: 1748]

[Sidenote: 1749]

The war of the Austrian succession was terminated in 1748, by the
treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, and in 1749 the regiment was placed on a
peace establishment.

Major-General the Honorable James Cholmondeley was removed to the
Twelfth Dragoons, in July, 1749; and was succeeded in the colonelcy
of the THIRTY-FOURTH Foot by Colonel the Honorable Henry Seymour
Conway, from the Forty-eighth Regiment.

[Sidenote: 1751]

On the 1st of July, 1751, regulations were issued, under the sign
manual, for establishing uniformity in the clothing, standards,
and colours of the several regiments; in which the facings of the
THIRTY-FOURTH were directed to be of _bright yellow_. The first,
or the King’s colour, was to be the Great Union; the second, or
regimental colour, to be of bright yellow silk, with the Union in
the upper canton; in the centre of the colour, the rank of the
regiment in gold Roman characters, within a wreath of roses and
thistles on the same stalk. The costume of the regiment at this
period was three-cornered cocked hats, bound with white lace, and
ornamented with a white loop and a black cockade; scarlet coats
faced and lined with bright yellow, and ornamented with white
lace; scarlet waistcoats and breeches; and white gaiters.

In December of this year, Colonel the Honorable Henry Seymour
Conway was removed to the Thirteenth Dragoons, and King George II.
conferred the colonelcy of the THIRTY-FOURTH Foot, on Colonel the
Honorable Charles Russell, from major in the Second Foot Guards.

[Sidenote: 1752]

[Sidenote: 1753]

Early in the year 1752, the regiment embarked for Minorca, the
second of the Balearic islands, situated in the Mediterranean, near
the coast of Spain: this island had fallen successively under the
dominion of the Carthaginians, the Romans, the Vandals, the Moors,
the Arragonese, and the Castilians; in 1708 it was captured by the
British, and it was ceded to Queen Anne at the peace of Utrecht in
1713. In this small island, which is diversified with hills and
valleys, and in some parts rich in vegetation, and abounding with
the necessaries and many of the luxuries of life, the THIRTY-FOURTH
were stationed several years.

[Sidenote: 1754]

Colonel the Honorable Charles Russell died on the 20th of November,
1754, and was succeeded in the command of the regiment by
Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Earl of Effingham, from the second troop,
now second regiment, of Life Guards.

[Sidenote: 1755]

[Sidenote: 1756]

While the regiment was stationed at Minorca, the undetermined
limits of the British and French territory in North America,
occasioned a war between the two kingdoms; and early in 1756, the
French monarch prepared a powerful armament for the capture of the
island of _Minorca_.

The French expedition, commanded by Marshal Duke of Richelieu,
arrived at Minorca in April, and effected a landing at Ciudadella;
and no part of the island being fortified to resist so powerful a
force, excepting _Fort St. Philip_, situate on a rocky promontory
at the entrance of the harbour of Port Mahon, the several
detachments were withdrawn from the interior, and assembled in the
fort, where they resolved on making a desperate defence, in the
hope of being reinforced.

The THIRTY-FOURTH mustered twenty-six officers, twenty-nine
serjeants, nineteen drummers, and six hundred and sixty-five rank
and file fit for duty, exclusive of thirteen sick, under the
command of Lieutenant-Colonel John Reed, for the defence of Fort
St. Philip, and the officers and soldiers evinced an extent of
personal bravery and resolution, which reflected honor on their
country. The garrison was commanded by Lieutenant-General Blakeney.

The siege of the fort was commenced by the enemy, and the
determined resistance encountered by the French commander
occasioned him to send for additional forces. The conduct of the
garrison became a subject of admiration, and the bravery and
vigilance of the officers inspired the soldiers with increased
confidence.

The British fleet was discovered on the 19th of May, and the
soldiers, having become exhausted by hard duty, were stimulated to
perseverance by the prospect of being speedily relieved; but were
disappointed: Admiral Byng skirmished with the French squadron,
and afterwards retired, for which conduct he was subsequently
brought to trial, and shot. Lieutenant-General Thomas Fowke,
then commanding at Gibraltar, was also brought to trial, for not
sending a reinforcement to Minorca, and sentenced to be suspended
for one year; the king confirmed the sentence, and directed
Lieutenant-General Fowke to be dismissed the service.

Although thus abandoned to their fate, the four regiments in
garrison at Fort St. Philip, (viz., the Fourth, Twenty-third,
Twenty-fourth, and THIRTY-FOURTH) defended their post with great
gallantry; incessant duty and watching so exhausted the soldiers,
that they frequently were overpowered by sleep under a heavy
cannonade, yet they persevered with admirable resolution. During
the night of the 27th of June, a general assault was made by the
enemy at several points, when the garrison met the assailants
with great courage, and repulsed them several times with much
slaughter,--many of the sick and wounded coming out of the
hospital to take part in the defence. The enemy’s superior numbers
enabled him to renew the attack, and after much severe fighting
he gained possession of three of the outworks. On the following
day, conditions of capitulation were tendered and accepted; when
the French marshal caused it to be inserted in the articles,--“The
noble and vigorous defence which the English have made, having
deserved all the marks of esteem and veneration which every
military man ought to show to such actions, and Marshal Richelieu
being desirous also to show to General Blakeney the regard due to
the defence he has made, grants to the garrison all the honors of
war they can enjoy under the circumstances of going out for an
embarkation; to wit,--firelocks on their shoulders, drums beating,
colours flying, twenty cartridges each man, and also lighted match.
He consents, also, that General Blakeney and his garrison carry
away all the effects that belong to them.”

On this subject, Beatson observes in his _Naval and Military
Memoirs_,--“Thus did four regiments, and one company of artillery,
maintain the fort against such numbers of the enemy, by sea and
land, for such a length of time, as can, perhaps, scarcely be
paralleled in history. The terms on which the fort was at last
surrendered by a handful of men, so distressed, so shattered, and
so neglected, remains a lasting monument to their honor.”

The regiment had Captain Hobby, Lieutenant Armstrong, and twelve
rank and file killed during the siege; also Captain Sir Hugh
Williams, Bart., and seventy-seven non-commissioned officers and
soldiers wounded; seven men died of their wounds, and two of
diseases produced by excessive exertion: at the general assault the
regiment only lost four men.

Immediately after the surrender of Fort St. Philip, the regiment
embarked for Gibraltar, and after a short stay at that fortress,
proceeded to England, where its arrival was hailed with
acclamations by the inhabitants of the towns through which it
passed, who were proud of the honor acquired by the regiments which
defended the principal fortress of Minorca.

[Sidenote: 1757]

Soon after its arrival in England the regiment was augmented to
_two battalions_, and in the summer of 1757, both battalions were
encamped on Barham downs, under the Duke of Marlborough: the second
battalion afterwards served on board the fleet as marines.

[Sidenote: 1758]

In June, 1758, the second battalion was constituted the
_Seventy-third Regiment_, under the command of Colonel Browne. This
regiment was disbanded at the peace in 1763.

The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment proceeded to the Isle of Wight, where
it was formed in brigade with the Twenty-fourth and Seventy-second
Regiments, under the orders of Major-General Granville Elliott,
and sailed with the armament, under the Duke of Marlborough, for
the purpose of reducing the maritime power of France, and making a
diversion in favour of the allied army in Germany. A landing was
effected on the coast of Brittany on the 5th of June, and the
French infantry and cavalry assembled to oppose the debarkation
were quickly dispersed. On the 7th of June the army advanced in two
columns towards _St. Maloes_, and encamping about a mile from the
town, sent a strong detachment to the harbour, to set fire to the
shipping, magazines, and maritime stores, when a grand and dreadful
scene of conflagration illuminated the coast, and was seen for many
miles. Having destroyed a valuable fleet, and extensive magazines
of maritime stores, the troops re-embarked, and preparations
were afterwards made for a descent at Granville, on the coast
of Normandy, and afterwards at Cherbourg; but the weather being
severe, the fleet returned to England.

This success was followed by the preparation of another expedition
of a similar character, in which the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment was
also employed; and on the 6th of August a landing was effected
in the Bay des Marées, in the face of a body of French troops.
On the following day _Cherbourg_ was taken possession of, with
the harbour, forts, magazines, and about two hundred pieces of
ordnance; the iron guns were destroyed, and twenty-two fine brass
cannon and two brass mortars, were sent to England as trophies.
These guns were seen by King George II., in Hyde Park, and
afterwards conducted by a cavalcade to the Tower.

After remaining in France ten days, the troops returned on board
the fleet, and a second descent was made on the coast of Brittany
on the 4th of September, when the batteries in the Bay of St.
Lunaire were destroyed, and the troops afterwards penetrated the
country a considerable distance; but no advantage resulted from
this enterprise, and when the troops re-embarked at _St. Cas_, the
enemy attacked the rear guard with superior numbers, and occasioned
severe loss. The THIRTY-FOURTH Foot returned to England, and
landed at Portsmouth towards the end of September.

[Sidenote: 1759]

[Sidenote: 1760]

In the summer of 1759, the THIRTY-FOURTH were encamped at
Sandheath, with the Fifth, Eighth, and Thirty-third Regiments,
under the Earl of Ancram; and in the summer of 1760, they pitched
their tents at Winchester, where five battalions of militia
were encamped with them, the whole under the colonel of the
THIRTY-FOURTH,--Thomas Earl of Effingham.

On the 30th of October, King George III. nominated the Earl of
Effingham to the command of the first troop of Horse Grenadier
Guards, (which was incorporated in the First Regiment of Life
Guards in 1788,) and his Majesty conferred the colonelcy of the
THIRTY-FOURTH on Lord Frederick Cavendish, from the Sixty-seventh
Regiment[11].

[Sidenote: 1761]

During the summer of 1761, the regiment was encamped, with the
Seventy-second Foot, at Sandheath, under Lieutenant-General
Cornwallis.

[Sidenote: 1762]

Meanwhile the conduct of the Spanish Government had led to an
interruption of the amicable relations existing between the
two countries, and in the early part of 1762 an attack on the
_Havannah_, in the island of Cuba, which was looked upon as a key
to the Spanish settlements in the West Indies, was resolved upon by
the British Government; and the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, mustering
one thousand officers and soldiers, under Lieutenant-Colonel
John Reed, embarked for this service; the expedition being under
General the Earl of Albemarle. On arriving at the West Indies, the
regiment was formed in brigade with the Thirty-fifth, Forty-third,
and Seventy-fifth Regiments, under Brigadier-General Reed; and
proceeding with the armament through the Straits of Bahama,
arrived in the vicinity of the Havannah on the 6th of June. On
the following day a landing was effected, and the siege of the
_Moro Fort_ was commenced by a body of troops under Major-General
the Honorable William Keppel. In the attack of this fortress,
the troops evinced that courage and patient perseverance under
severe toil and privation, for which British soldiers have been
distinguished, and united with the cordial co-operation of the
royal navy, overcame all difficulties. Batteries were erected, the
sallies of the Spaniards repulsed, and the Moro Fort captured by
storm on the 30th of July. This success facilitated the attack on
the Havannah, and a series of batteries opened so well-directed a
fire on the works of the town, and on the shipping in the harbour,
on the 11th of August, that in a few hours the guns of the garrison
were silenced, and the Spaniards solicited terms of capitulation,
which were speedily agreed upon. The wealthy city of the Havannah,
with a valuable fleet of Spanish men-of-war, and numerous stores,
were thus captured by British skill and valour, and prize money to
a large amount was afterwards distributed to the army and navy.
“This conquest was, without doubt, in itself the most considerable,
and in its consequences the most decisive, of any we had made since
the beginning of the war; and in no operation were the courage,
steadiness, and perseverance of the British troops, and the conduct
of their leaders, more conspicuous. It was a military achievement
of the highest class[12].”

The regiment was commanded, on this occasion, by Major Robert
Farmar, (Lieutenant-Colonel Reed being at the head of the brigade,)
and after taking part in this splendid conquest, it was stationed a
short time at the Havannah.

[Sidenote: 1763]

In the following year a treaty of peace was concluded, and the
Spaniards ceded to Great Britain the country of Florida, in North
America, on condition of having the Havannah restored to them,
which was agreed to; and the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment was one of the
corps which proceeded to North America, to take possession of the
ceded territory.

[Sidenote: 1764]

[Sidenote: 1768]

[Sidenote: 1769]

In the pleasant and fertile country of West Florida, the regiment
was stationed some time; in 1768 it was relieved from duty in North
America, and returned to Europe, and in 1769 it was stationed in
Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1770]

[Sidenote: 1774]

The regiment was quartered in Ireland seven years; and was equally
conspicuous for good conduct on home service, as it had been for
gallantry when confronting the enemies of its country abroad.

[Sidenote: 1775]

In 1775, the misunderstanding between Great Britain and her
North American provinces, on the subject of taxation, attained
a character which produced hostilities, and the THIRTY-FOURTH
Regiment was augmented to the war establishment. The American
Congress sent a body of troops, under Colonel Montgomery, to invade
Canada, where Major-General Carleton, afterwards Lord Dorchester,
commanded, and the English general, having very few troops to
oppose to the enemy, evacuated Montreal, and retired to _Quebec_.
The Americans detached a division of troops, under Colonel Arnold,
to surprise Quebec; but this enterprise failed, through the
activity and vigilance of Major-General Carleton, who defended
that fortress against the united provincial forces, and repulsed
an assault made on the works, during a snow storm, in the depth of
winter.

[Sidenote: 1776]

The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment embarked from Ireland early in the
spring of 1776, for the relief of Quebec; and on the arrival,
in the river St. Lawrence, of the expected succours from the
United Kingdom, in May, the Americans quitted the vicinity of
that fortress, and made a precipitate retreat. The THIRTY-FOURTH
Regiment advanced up the country in pursuit of the provincial
troops, and took part in the movements by which the Americans were
driven out of Canada. The regiment was stationed in Canada during
the winter.

[Sidenote: 1777]

In the spring of 1777, the flank companies of the regiment were
detached from Canada, with the army under Lieutenant-General
Burgoyne, which was destined to proceed, by Lakes Champlain and
George, to Hudson’s river, with the view of forcing its way
to Albany, and co-operating with the army at New York, in the
reduction of the revolted states. The troops employed on this
service embarked on board a flotilla, and, after a pleasant
voyage along Lake Champlain, landed at Crown Point, from whence
they advanced towards Ticonderago, and forced the Americans to
abandon the fort. This conquest achieved, the troops proceeded to
Skenesborough, and drove the enemy from a stockaded fort on the 6th
of July, and pursued them towards Castletown. On the 8th of July
the Americans were repulsed in an attack on the Ninth Regiment,
and driven from Fort Anne. After this success, preparations were
made for a forward movement; but extraordinary difficulties
had to be encountered; felled trees had to be removed from the
roads,--creeks and marshes had to be passed,--forty new bridges
had to be constructed, and others to be repaired; one made of
log-work crossed a morass two miles in extent. These difficulties
were overcome by the soldiers with cheerful alacrity, and on the
30th of July the troops arrived on the banks of the Hudson’s
river, when they took post at Fort Edward, awaiting the arrival
of provisions. The river was crossed in September, and a forward
movement was made; but the expedition proved of insufficient
force for the enterprise, and the means for supplying the troops
inadequate. Having penetrated into the heart of the revolted
provinces, Lieutenant-General Burgoyne found himself encompassed
by difficulties and dangers which he was unable to overcome. After
a series of hard toil, incessant effort, and severe privation, the
Indian warriors, who formed part of the expedition, deserted, and
many of the Canadians followed their example; and after several
stubborn engagements, in which the British regiments fought
gallantly against an immense superiority of numbers, and the flank
companies of the THIRTY-FOURTH Foot had repeated opportunities
of distinguishing themselves, Lieutenant-General Burgoyne found
himself on the banks of the Hudson’s river, with an army diminished
in numbers to three thousand five hundred men,--reduced in physical
power by incessant toil and want of provisions,--invested by an
army of sixteen thousand Americans,--disappointed of co-operation
from other armies,--and without provision. Under these dismal
circumstances, a convention was concluded with the American General
Gates, at Saratoga, in which it was agreed that the troops should
lay down their arms, on condition of being sent to England, and
of not serving in America during the remainder of the war. These
articles were violated by the American government, and the brave
soldiers who had fought so gallantly, and who did not submit until
surrounded by five times their own numbers, were detained prisoners
in America.

The battalion companies of the regiment, which had remained in
Canada, were not involved in this occurrence.

In the several actions between the Americans and the troops
under Lieutenant-General Burgoyne, the flank companies of the
THIRTY-FOURTH had a number of men killed and wounded; also Captains
Harris and Ross, and Lieutenant Richardson, wounded.

The battalion companies furnished a detachment of one hundred men,
for the expedition to the _Mohawk_, under Brigadier-General Barry
St. Leger. This detachment was engaged in the unsuccessful siege of
_Fort Stanwix_.

[Sidenote: 1778]

The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment formed part of the force to which the
protection of Canada was confided during the remainder of the
American war, which was terminated in 1782, by a treaty of peace,
in which the independence of the United States was acknowledged.

[Sidenote: 1782]

A letter, dated the 31st of August, 1782, conveyed to the
regiment His Majesty’s pleasure that it should assume the title
of the THIRTY-FOURTH, OR CUMBERLAND REGIMENT OF FOOT, and that a
connection and mutual attachment between the corps and that county
should be cultivated, in order to promote the success of the
recruiting service.

[Sidenote: 1786]

[Sidenote: 1787]

The regiment remained in Canada until 1786, when it was relieved,
and returned to Europe. In 1787 it was stationed in England.

[Sidenote: 1792]

[Sidenote: 1793]

[Sidenote: 1795]

On the breaking out of the French revolutionary war, the
establishment of the regiment was augmented. In 1793 a British army
proceeded to Flanders; but the THIRTY-FOURTH remained in Great
Britain until the middle of February, 1795, when they embarked for
the West Indies.

Previous to this date the revolutionary principles, which had
involved France in anarchy and crime, had extended to the French
West India islands; but the planters of these colonies had
been delivered from the power of the republicans by a British
armament, under General Sir Charles (afterwards Earl) Grey; the
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Dickens,
proceeded to St. Lucia, which island had been captured from the
French in April, 1794.

The National Convention which governed France, although employed in
extending revolutionary power in Europe, paid so much attention to
the colonial interests of that nation, as to send an expedition to
the West Indies, for the recovery of the conquered islands; and the
doctrines of liberty and equality, which were disseminated in the
islands, occasioned multitudes of mulattoes, blacks, and Charibbees
to array themselves under the standard of republicanism, which led
to a frightful catalogue of outrages and depredations. _St. Lucia_,
where the THIRTY-FOURTH were stationed, was among the colonies
attacked by the enemy, and the regiment was engaged a short period
in its defence, in which it lost several men, and Captain Dodsworth
was taken prisoner, on the 18th of June. The British troops not
being sufficiently numerous for the defence of the island, it was
evacuated, the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment proceeding to _St. Vincent_,
where republican emissaries from France had organised a rebellion,
and many whites, mulattoes, blacks, and native Charibbees, were in
arms against the British Government, which occasioned the regiment
much severe service[13].

[Sidenote: 1796]

Early in 1796, additional forces arrived at the West Indies, where
Lieutenant-General Sir Ralph Abercromby assumed the command of an
armament to complete the deliverance of the West India islands
from the power of the republicans, and to reduce to obedience the
insurgents of St. Vincent and Grenada.

On the 8th of June, a body of troops landed at the island of St.
Vincent, and were joined by the THIRTY-FOURTH Foot, commanded
by Lieutenant-Colonel Dickens, who had the honour of taking
a distinguished part in the reduction of the colony, which
was accomplished in a few days. Part of the regiment evinced
signal gallantry at the assault and capture of the insurgent
camp, on, the 10th of June, when Sir Ralph Abercromby stated in
orders,--“Lieutenant-Colonel Dickens, and the troops who served
under him, are entitled to a great share of praise.” The regiment
had two serjeants, one drummer, and six rank and file killed;
Volunteer Gordon died of his wounds; Lieutenants O’Donoughue and
Georges, nine serjeants, three drummers, and sixteen rank and file
wounded.

The hostile spirit long shown by the Charibbees towards the
European inhabitants, occasioned the British Government to
determine to remove them from the island; and the execution of the
orders received for this purpose was attended with much harassing
duty to the troops, in which the THIRTY-FOURTH took part, and
sustained some loss. The regiment afterwards received the thanks
of Major-General Hunter, and of the principal inhabitants of the
colony, for its conduct in the brigand and Charibbee war.

On the 15th of July, the regiment embarked for England, where
it arrived on the 8th of October, and was stationed at Poole,
in Dorsetshire, from whence recruiting parties were detached to
various towns in South Britain.

[Sidenote: 1797]

In the spring of 1797[14], the regiment proceeded to York, where
the non-commissioned officers and soldiers evinced their loyalty
and zeal for the preservation of the constitution of their country,
by a contribution in aid of the war, for which they received the
thanks of Lieutenant-General Scott, commanding the district. In the
autumn the regiment marched to Lincoln.

Field-Marshal Lord Frederick Cavendish was succeeded in the
colonelcy of the regiment in July by George Frederick Lord
Southampton, from captain and lieutenant-colonel Second Foot Guards.

[Sidenote: 1798]

[Sidenote: 1799]

The regiment remained in England during the years 1798 and 1799,
and, having been brought into a high state of discipline and
efficiency, it was selected to proceed on colonial service.

[Sidenote: 1800]

In January, 1800, the regiment marched from Hilsea barracks, and
embarking on board an Indiaman, sailed to the Cape of Good Hope,
where it landed on the 21st of May, and occupied barracks at Cape
Town until September, when it pitched its tents at Wynberg, where a
numerous force was encamped under Major-General Dundas.

[Sidenote: 1801]

[Sidenote: 1802]

[Sidenote: 1803]

After remaining two years and a half at the Cape of Good Hope, that
colony was restored to the Dutch, at the peace of Amiens, in 1802,
and the regiment embarked for the East Indies, where it arrived in
January, 1803, and landed at Madras on the 2nd of February.

The regiment was stationed at Madras several months, during which
period the conduct of the officers and soldiers on the occasion
of an alarming fire, elicited the following communication to
Colonel Dickens, from the merchants of that place:--“Impressed
with a grateful sense of the extraordinary exertions manifested
by the officers and men of His Majesty’s THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment,
under your command, on the occasion of the late calamitous fires,
we feel it incumbent upon us to offer you and them our public
acknowledgements for the service rendered to the commercial
interests in particular, and at the same time to request you will
be assured of our sincere respect for the public spirit which
uniformly animates the British military on every emergency.”

The peace of Europe was violated by the ambitious projects of
Napoleon Bonaparte, First Consul of France, and the war was resumed
in 1803, in July of which year two companies of the regiment
embarked, under Captain Everard, for the island of Ceylon, which
had been captured from the Dutch, and they were followed by two
additional companies, under Captain Roberts, in October.

[Sidenote: 1804]

In 1804 the head-quarters were removed from Madras to Wallajabad,
where they arrived on the 21st of August. In December a detachment
returned to Madras, where it embarked for Vizagapatam, to protect
the shipping.

In the mean time the menace of invading England, made by Napoleon
Bonaparte, had been followed by a simultaneous appeal to arms
throughout the United Kingdom, and an array of military power was
manifested which proved the attachment of the British people to
their sovereign and constitution. On this memorable occasion a
_second battalion_ was added to the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, and
was embodied at Ashford, in Kent. It was formed of volunteers from
the First East York, Third West York, First Lancashire, South
Lincoln, and East Essex Regiments of Militia, and was placed on the
establishment of the army on the 25th of April, 1805.

Soon after its formation, the second battalion marched to
Colchester.

[Sidenote: 1805]

BONAPARTE obtained the dignity of EMPEROR from the French nation,
was crowned King of Italy, and added Genoa to his dominions; he
afterwards marched his army from Boulogne to crush the coalition
forming against his interests in Germany; at the same time the
French troops were withdrawn from Hanover, which country they had
seized soon after the resuming of hostilities in 1803. A body of
troops was sent to Hanover under Lieutenant-General Lord Cathcart,
to co-operate with the continental powers; and on the 28th of
November the second battalion of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment marched
to Ramsgate for embarkation for Germany, under the orders of Major
Broomhead. The battle of Austerlitz established the preponderance
of French power; in a subsequent treaty it was stipulated that
Hanover should be occupied by the Prussians, and the British
troops, under Lord Cathcart, withdrew to the coast and embarked
for England. On its return from this expedition, the battalion was
quartered on the coast of Sussex.

In March of this year, the detachment of the first battalion was
withdrawn from Ceylon, and joined the head-quarters at Wallajabad;
and in April four companies proceeded to the fortress of Vellore,
which had been chosen for the residence of the captive princes of
the race of Hyder and Tippoo, with the two hostages given up to
Lord Cornwallis. In October, the battalion was united at Bellary.

[Sidenote: 1806]

During the year 1806, the first battalion was in garrison at the
fortresses of Gooty and Bellary. Lieutenant-Colonel Fancourt of the
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment was commandant of Vellore, and was killed in
the mutiny which took place among the Sepoys and Moormen, on the
morning of the 10th July, 1806.

[Sidenote: 1807]

In April, the second battalion embarked for the island of Jersey,
where it remained until May, 1807, when it was removed to the Isle
of Wight, in order to its embarkation for the island of Ceylon;
but while waiting for shipping, its destination was changed, and
it proceeded to Cork, to join a secret expedition ordered to
rendezvous at that place, under Brigadier-General Beresford. The
expedition sailed to Madeira, and took possession of that island;
but the THIRTY-FOURTH landed in Ireland, were stationed at Bandon
barracks, and placed under orders to proceed to India.

[Sidenote: 1808]

In December they embarked from Cork, and sailed to Spithead, where
they arrived on the 18th of January, 1808; but circumstances
had occurred which occasioned their embarkation for India to be
countermanded; they landed and marched to Steyning barracks, where
they remained until May, when they returned to the island of Jersey.

During this period, the first battalion had remained at Gooty and
Bellary.

[Sidenote: 1809]

The second battalion was stationed at Jersey until the summer
of 1809, when it was completed to a thousand rank and file by
volunteers from the militia, and embarked for the Peninsula, to
join the British army, under Sir Arthur Wellesley, and take part
in the deliverance of Portugal and Spain from the tyrannical
domination of the Emperor Napoleon, who was attempting to bring
those kingdoms under his despotic sway. After landing at Lisbon,
on the 4th of July, the battalion was encamped near that place,
with the brigade under Brigadier-General James Catlin Craufurd,
for three weeks, and afterwards proceeded in boats up the river
Tagus, under Lieutenant-Colonel Maister, to Santarem, from whence
it marched into Spain, to co-operate with the troops under
Lieutenant-General Lord Wellington, who had driven the French from
Portugal, and repulsed the army under Joseph Bonaparte (titular
King of Spain) at Talavera, a short time before. After several
movements, the brigade joined the army under Lord Wellington in
Spanish Estremadura; and the THIRTY-FOURTH were placed in village
cantonments on the right bank of the Guadiana, near Badajoz, where
the battalion suffered from the epidemic fever which thinned the
British ranks.

When Lord Wellington marched northward, the THIRTY-FOURTH were left
in Portuguese Estremadura, under Lieutenant-General Sir Rowland
Hill.

In the mean time, the disaffection to the civil authorities of
Madras, which occurred in the native army in India, particularly
among the European officers, had occasioned the first battalion
to be withdrawn from garrison, and to be employed in services
necessary to bring the disaffected to submission; at the same
time four captains and eight lieutenants were attached to the
Company’s artillery, and to the Seventh, Ninth, Twenty-second,
and Twenty-fifth Regiments of native infantry, in the place of
the suspended officers: officers of the THIRTY-FOURTH were also
appointed to perform the duties of assistant adjutant-general,
fort-adjutant, and deputy judge advocate.

[Sidenote: 1810]

The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment performed many long marches with the
field force, under Colonel Conran, of the First, or the Royal
Regiment of Foot, in October, November, and December, 1809, and it
was also frequently in motion during the first four months of 1810.
On the 8th of May it encamped at Jaulnah, and was in tents during
the periodical heavy rains: in October it moved into temporary
barracks. Previous to this period, the arrival of Lord Minto,
Governor-General of India, had been followed by happy results, and
the authority of the civil government of Madras had been restored.

In the Peninsula, the immense preparations of the French for
the campaign of 1810, induced Lord Wellington to limit his
operations to the defence of Portugal; and the second battalion
of the THIRTY-FOURTH was employed, with the division under
Lieutenant-General Sir Rowland Hill, on the Alemtejo frontier, in
opposition to the French under General Reynier. Portugal being
invaded by a powerful French army, under Marshal Massena, Prince
of Esling, the British forces withdrew before the superior numbers
of the enemy. The movements of the THIRTY-FOURTH were the same as
those of the second division of the army, and after passing the
Mondego river, early on the morning of the 26th of September, they
took post on the right of the position on the rocks of _Busaco_,
where an array of British power was prepared to resist the torrent
of invasion. The Prince of Esling assailed this position on the
27th of September, when the furious attacks of the veteran legions
of Napoleon were repulsed by British valour. After astonishing
efforts, the French fell back; and they subsequently turned
the left of the position by a flank movement; when the British
commander withdrew to the lines of _Torres Vedras_, where a series
of works, along a range of lofty mountains, opposed a formidable
barrier to the progress of the enemy. The THIRTY-FOURTH had their
post in the lines, and were stationed at Calendrix, and afterwards
at Bucellas.

The French commander viewed the stupendous works of Torres Vedras
with surprise, and being unable to accomplish his menace of driving
the English into the sea, and planting the eagles of France on
the towers of Lisbon, he withdrew to Santarem in the middle of
November. On the retrograde movement of the enemy taking place,
the division of which the THIRTY-FOURTH formed part, was ordered
to cross the Tagus, and move upon Abrantes, to succour that place,
or head the march of the enemy. The battalion passed the river on
rafts; but when the enemy was found in position at Santarem, Sir
Rowland Hill’s division was ordered to halt at Chamusca.

The battalion passed the winter in village cantonments on the left
bank of the Tagus, and the country being low and marshy, the health
of the soldiers suffered from agues.

On the decease of Lord Southampton, in the summer of this year, the
colonelcy of the regiment was conferred on Lieutenant-General Sir
Eyre Coote, from the Sixty-second Foot.

[Sidenote: 1811]

The first battalion suffered from the effects of the climate at
Jaulnah, in the East Indies, and was removed in May, 1811, to
Secunderabad; when it left one hundred and thirty men in hospital.

To the second battalion was appointed the duty of watching the
movements of the enemy, to prevent the passage of the Tagus by the
French. On one occasion an island in the river was taken possession
of by a detachment of the enemy; but the light companies of the
brigade, of which the THIRTY-FOURTH formed part, dislodged the
French, and the island was occupied by a company of the regiment,
until the 5th of March, when the Prince of Esling quitted his
position and retreated.

The THIRTY-FOURTH pursued the retreating enemy towards the
confines of Portugal, witnessing scenes of slaughter, devastation,
and confusion, produced by the French army, beyond description;
the battalion was afterwards detached, with other forces, under
Field-Marshal Sir William Carr Beresford, to the relief of _Campo
Mayor_, which fortress was besieged by a detachment from the
French army, commanded by Marshal Soult. This place surrendered
before the troops marching to its relief arrived, and as the
British approached, the French, having dismantled the works, were
marching out of the town, when some fighting occurred, in which the
Thirteenth Light Dragoons evinced great gallantry.

The fortress of Olivenza was afterwards captured; and the siege of
_Badajoz_ was commenced, in which the THIRTY-FOURTH were employed
and sustained some loss.

While the siege of Badajoz was in progress, Marshal Soult assembled
a numerous force, and advanced to the relief of that fortress, when
Marshal Beresford moved forward to meet him, and took up a position
at _Albuhera_, where he was joined by a Spanish division under
General Blake. The THIRTY-FOURTH, commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel
William Fenwick, were in position, and were formed in brigade with
the first battalion of the Twenty-eighth and the second battalion
of the Thirty-ninth Regiments, under Lieutenant-Colonel the
Honorable Alexander Abercromby.

On the morning of the 16th of May, the enemy made a slight attack
on the village of Albuhera, and on the bridge, to draw attention
to that point; and soon afterwards powerful columns of infantry,
supported by a numerous force of cavalry and artillery, assailed
the heights on the right, from which the Spaniards were forced
to retire. Lieutenant-Colonel Colborne’s brigade of the second
division, under Lieutenant-General Stewart, rushed up the heights
with great gallantry; but was nearly annihilated by a charge of
the enemy’s Polish lancers and hussars on its rear. Major-General
Hoghton reached the heights with the third brigade, under a heavy
cannonade, and was soon engaged in a furious contest in which many
officers and soldiers fell, and Major-General Hoghton was shot in
the act of cheering his men: the battle raged with dreadful fury,
and this brigade was nearly destroyed.

At a critical moment the Fusiliers mounted the hill on the
right of the remnant of the third brigade, at the same time the
Twenty-eighth, THIRTY-FOURTH, and Thirty-ninth passed on its left;
and this gallant line arrested the progress of the French columns,
which were pressing forward in anticipation of victory. The heads
of the enemy’s masses were broken by the steady fire of the British
soldiers, who closed on their numerous adversaries, and sternly
contended for victory. The THIRTY-FOURTH were severely engaged;
many officers and soldiers fell, and Ensign Sarsfield, bearing
the regimental colour, was shot; the colour was seized by another
officer, and the battalion pressed forward upon its opponents, who,
by a determined and continued attack, were driven from the heights,
and the British soldiers stood victorious on the contested hill.

Marshal Soult, finding that his French soldiers could not force the
position, withdrew beyond the river, and the battle was thus won by
the divisions of the allied army, under Marshal Sir William Carr
Beresford, who stated in his public despatch,--“It is impossible
to enumerate every instance of discipline and valour shown on this
severely contested day; but never troops more valiantly or more
gloriously maintained the honor of their respective countries.”

Captain George Gibbons, Lieutenant Thomas Castle, and Ensign
Sarsfield, with three serjeants, and twenty-seven rank and file
of the THIRTY-FOURTH were killed; and Captains G. J. Widdrington
and John Wyatt, Lieutenants John Hay, and ---- Walsh, with six
serjeants, and eighty-five rank and file wounded.

The word “ALBUHERA,” displayed by royal authority, on the colours
of the regiment, commemorates the distinguished gallantry of the
second battalion on this occasion; and a medal was conferred on its
commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel William Fenwick.

After the victory at Albuhera, the siege of _Badajoz_ was resumed;
but the advance of two powerful French armies, under Marshal
Massena and Marshal Soult, occasioned the British commander to
raise the siege and take post behind the Caya, where the superior
numbers of the enemy did not venture to attack him, and in a short
time the French retired. Lord Wellington marched the main body of
the army to the province of Beira, leaving ten thousand infantry,
with a proportion of cavalry and artillery, in the Alemtejo, under
Sir Rowland Hill; and the THIRTY-FOURTH formed a part of this force.

General Girard’s division of the Fifth French corps having taken
post at Caceres, Sir Rowland Hill advanced, on the 22nd of October,
to drive the enemy from thence, and on the approach of the British
troops, the French retired, halting at _Arroyo de Molinos_, a
village situate in a plain at the foot of a ridge of rocks rising
in the form of a crescent. An opportunity presenting itself to
effect the surprise of this corps, the British performed a forced
march in cold, wet, stormy weather, and arrived at the vicinity
of the village at daybreak on the morning of the 28th of October,
their approach being concealed by a thick mist with heavy rain. The
French infantry were assembling outside the village to commence
their march, the baggage was being loaded, and General Girard
was waiting at his quarters for his horse, when suddenly the
Seventy-first and Ninety-second British Regiments charged into the
village, capturing much baggage and many prisoners; at the same
time the Twenty-eighth and THIRTY-FOURTH made a detour, supported
by the Thirty-ninth, to cut off the enemy’s retreat. The French
formed two squares, and commenced retreating; the British pressed
resolutely upon their opponents; the Thirteenth Light Dragoons
captured the French artillery, the Ninth Light Dragoons and Second
Hussars King’s German Legion overpowered the enemy’s cavalry, and
the Twenty-eighth and THIRTY-FOURTH Foot cut off the retreat of
the French infantry by the main road. Thus beset on every side,
the French soldiers dispersed, and rushed with great speed up the
steep mountain by an unfrequented path; when the Twenty-eighth and
THIRTY-FOURTH British Foot passed a ploughed field at a running
pace, and ascended the difficult precipice in pursuit, chasing
the enemy among the rugged heights, and capturing many prisoners;
a battalion of the _French Thirty-fourth Regiment_ being made
prisoners on this occasion by the second battalion of the British
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment[15]. The French General Brun, and Colonel
the Prince d’Aremberg, were among the prisoners.

Sir Rowland Hill, speaking of the troops employed in this service,
stated in his despatch,--“No praise of mine can do full justice to
their admirable conduct; the patience and goodwill shown by all
ranks during forced marches, in the worst of weather; their strict
attention to the orders they received; the precision with which
they moved to the attack; and their obedience to command during the
action; in short, the manner every one has performed his duty from
the commencement of the operation, merits my warmest thanks.” The
conduct of Lieutenant-Colonel Fenwick, of the THIRTY-FOURTH, was
particularly commanded.

After this exploit the troops returned to the Alemtejo.

Towards the end of December the THIRTY-FOURTH again advanced into
Spain, and were employed in operations to surprise a body of French
troops at Merida, under General Dombrouski. On arriving at _La
Nava_, the British cavalry found three hundred French infantry and
a party of hussars in the town, and this body of troops, effecting
its retreat to Merida with little loss, informed General Dombrouski
of the approach of the British troops, and he retreated during the
night.

[Sidenote: 1812]

In January, 1812, the siege of _Ciudad Rodrigo_ was undertaken, and
the THIRTY-FOURTH and other corps, under Sir Rowland Hill, made
a movement to co-operate in covering the troops employed in this
enterprise, which ended in the capture of the besieged fortress by
storm on the 19th of January.

When the siege of _Badajoz_ was undertaken, the THIRTY-FOURTH
formed part of the covering army, and were stationed some time at
Merida. The two divisions of the covering army, under Sir Rowland
Hill and Sir Thomas Graham, afterwards advanced upon Almendralejos
and Llerena, the THIRTY-FOURTH moving towards the former town.
Marshal Soult collected a numerous force and advanced to relieve
_Badajoz_; but learning that on the 6th of April that fortress was
captured by storm, he retraced his steps.

After the capture of Badajoz, Lord Wellington proceeded towards
the northern frontiers of Portugal, leaving the THIRTY-FOURTH in
Estremadura, under Sir Rowland Hill; and in May the battalion
was employed in an enterprise for the destruction of the enemy’s
communication across the Tagus at _Almaraz_. After a march made
with great secrecy, amidst various divisions of the enemy, the
troops approached the bridge, the THIRTY-FOURTH being with the
left column, which was prepared with ladders to capture the fort
of Mirabete by escalade; but the difficulties of the march had
retarded the progress of the troops, and as the attack could not
be made before daylight, they remained concealed in the mountains
until the evening of the 18th of May, when they moved forward. At
daybreak, on the following morning, the left column, of which the
THIRTY-FOURTH formed part, commenced a slight attack on the castle
of Mirabete, at the same time another column captured the forts,
which covered the bridge, by storm.

Speaking of the THIRTY-FOURTH, and other corps which operated on
the Mirabete, Sir Rowland Hill stated in his despatch, “I regret
much that the peculiar situation of Mirabete should have prevented
my allowing the gallant corps to follow up an operation which they
had commenced with much spirit, and were anxious to complete.”

The bridge having been destroyed, and the communication between the
several divisions of the French army rendered more difficult, the
British troops retired.

[Sidenote: 1813]

After the victory gained by the army under Lord Wellington at
Salamanca, the troops under Sir Rowland Hill penetrated the Spanish
provinces, and eventually advanced upon Madrid: they afterwards
occupied a line from Toledo to Aranjuez. The THIRTY-FOURTH took
part in these movements; and when the concentration of the
enemy’s forces rendered a retrograde movement necessary, the
battalion suffered, in common with the other corps, the fatigues
and privations consequent upon this retreat;--the soldiers were
not able to procure any other food besides acorns, chesnuts, and
berries from the hedges, for nineteen days together; and the
inclemency of the weather augmented the sufferings endured on this
occasion. The retreat was continued to the frontiers of Portugal,
where the army went into winter quarters.

During this year the first battalion was stationed at Secunderabad,
in the East Indies.

After passing several months in quarters in Estremadura, the
second battalion of the THIRTY-FOURTH advanced, in May, 1813, with
the troops under Sir Rowland Hill, upon Salamanca, thus taking part
in the comprehensive movements by which the enemy’s position on
the Douro was turned, and the French divisions forced to retreat.
The THIRTY-FOURTH followed the enemy in his retrograde movements,
advancing upon Valladolid, and afterwards upon Burgos, and on the
12th of June the battalion took part in forcing a strong body of
French troops from _Hormaza_; which was followed by the destruction
of Burgos Castle, and the retreat of the enemy behind the Ebro
river. The battalion took part in the movement through the wild
and beautiful regions towards the source of the Ebro, and after
traversing rocks, and mountains, and narrow defiles, it crossed
the Ebro; when the enemy again fell back, and Joseph Bonaparte
concentrated his force in the valley of _Vittoria_, to arrest the
progress of the British arms.

After taking part in these brilliant operations, the THIRTY-FOURTH
had the honor to contribute to the complete overthrow of the French
army on the 21st of June. On this occasion the battalion formed
part of the column under Lieutenant-General Sir Rowland Hill, which
advanced at day-break, and seizing the bridge of Puebla, crossed
the Zadora river; the Spaniards under General Morillo attacking
the heights of La Puebla, and the British advancing along the
Vittoria road. The French commander sent a strong body of troops
to regain the heights, and two British battalions were detached to
aid the Spaniards. Before the fighting at this point had ceased,
Sir Rowland Hill’s column issued fiercely from the defiles of
Puebla, and captured the village of Sabijana de Alava. The heights
at this point, some thickly wooded ground, and the village, became
the theatre of a severe contest, in which the THIRTY-FOURTH,
under Lieutenant-Colonel Fenwick, were warmly engaged. The troops
advanced under a heavy cannonade; but undismayed by the determined
countenance of the foe, and regardless of a shower of bullets, the
British infantry rushed forward, dislodged the enemy, and drove him
back on his reserve. In vain the French endeavoured to recover the
lost ground; columns of attack were formed, and repeated efforts
made; but all without success. The other columns of the allied
army were also victorious at their several points of attack, and
the legions of Napoleon sustained a decisive overthrow; they were
driven from the field with the loss of their artillery, baggage,
and military chest, and were pursued until dark.

The THIRTY-FOURTH had ten rank and file killed; Lieutenants T. G.
Ball, Edward Mogridge, and Alan B. Cairnes, four serjeants, and
fifty-nine rank and file wounded.

Lieutenant-Colonel Fenwick received a clasp, in addition to his
medal for the battle of Albuhera; and the royal authority was
afterwards given for the word “VITTORIA” to be inscribed on the
regimental colours, to commemorate the gallantry of the second
battalion on this occasion.

The THIRTY-FOURTH followed the retreating enemy to the foot of the
Pyrenean mountains, and were some time employed in the blockade
of _Pampeluna_. While on the march for this place, the battalion
was exposed, on the 24th of June, to a violent thunder-storm, when
Lieutenant Masterman, an officer of approved gallantry and of great
promise, was killed by lightning: his horse was also killed under
him.

Notwithstanding the enemy had withdrawn his right and left into
France, he maintained his centre in force in the rich valley
of _Bastan_, which afforded numerous strong positions; and
the troops, under Sir Rowland Hill, having been relieved from
the blockade of Pampeluna, advanced to dislodge the enemy. On
penetrating the mountains, in the early part of July, the left
wing of the THIRTY-FOURTH was engaged in dislodging the enemy from
one of the villages in the pass. The battalion also took part in
forcing the French from the valley of Bastan, and being in advance,
on the 7th of July, it drove the enemy’s piquets from the heights
of Maya: it was afterwards attacked by a strong line of French
troops; but the Thirty-ninth coming up, the two battalions repulsed
the enemy by a few well-directed volleys.

One private soldier of the THIRTY-FOURTH was killed, and ten rank
and file were wounded; Lieutenant Ball, who had recovered of the
wounds received at Vittoria, was again severely wounded.

After taking part in forcing the enemy from the valley of Bastan,
the THIRTY-FOURTH were employed in guarding the _Col-de-Maya_,
one of the entrances to the valley; they were encamped in the
Arestesque Pass, about two miles from the summit of the mountain,
and furnished a piquet on the lofty rock of Arestesque.

Marshal Soult, having been appointed to the command of the troops
on the Pyrenees frontier of France, assembled a numerous force
to break through the mountains, and relieve Pampeluna and St.
Sebastian. Captain Moyle Sherer, of the THIRTY-FOURTH Foot,
commanded the piquet on the Arestesque rock, on the morning of
the 25th of July, and a glimpse of cavalry and infantry advancing
having been obtained at dawn, the light companies were ordered to
support the piquet. These companies had just formed, with their
left at the rock, when three French divisions ascended the rock
and attacked the piquet, which defended its ground with great
gallantry, against overwhelming numbers, until Captain Sherer
was taken prisoner, and many men had fallen, when the survivors
fell back on the light companies; and these troops sustained the
assault of the enemy with difficulty. The din of war echoed through
the valley, and the brigade, consisting of the Twenty-eighth,
THIRTY-FOURTH, and Thirty-ninth, hurried to the scene of conflict.
The THIRTY-FOURTH ascended the rock first, by companies, at a
running pace, and arrived breathless from the length and ruggedness
of the ascent. The grenadier company was in front, under Captain
John Wyatt, who urged his men to make a desperate effort, and fell
pierced with many bullets the instant he gained the summit; nearly
every man of the leading section experienced the same fate. The
other companies of the battalion rushed forward in the face of a
storm of musketry, and a determined, but unavailing, effort was
made. The commanding officer, the adjutant, and many other brave
officers and soldiers, were struck by the tempest of balls. After
fighting with great desperation some time, the THIRTY-FOURTH,
the light companies, and the piquet were forced back by superior
numbers, and the enemy established his columns on the ridge of the
position. The British, however, retained possession of a rock,
which was the key of the pass, and the progress of the enemy was
arrested.

The THIRTY-FOURTH had five hundred and thirty officers and soldiers
engaged on this occasion, and their loss was Captain John Wyatt,
Ensign T. W. Phillips, one serjeant, and thirty-six rank and
file killed; Adjutant John Day mortally wounded and prisoner;
Lieutenant-Colonel Fenwick, Lieutenants P. S. Barron and M.
Simmons, Ensign S. Pickett, four serjeants, and fifty-one rank
and file wounded; Captain Moyle Sherer, Lieutenant F. Hovenden,
Ensigns F. Russell and John Norman, one serjeant, one drummer, and
seventy-seven rank and file prisoners: many of the prisoners were
wounded. Total loss, one hundred and eighty-two.

Lieutenant-Colonel Fenwick had his right leg amputated above the
knee; and the command of the battalion devolved on Major Henry
Worsley.

The enemy’s attacks being developed, and other points of the
position in the mountains forced, Sir Rowland Hill retired during
the night fifteen miles, to a post in the rear of Irueta. The
THIRTY-FOURTH halted on the heights of Irueta until the evening of
the 27th, and marched during the night through the pass of Villate,
upon the town of Lanz, and afterwards upon Lizasso: the British
army went into position to cover the blockade of Pampeluna, and
the troops under Sir Rowland Hill formed on the left of the line.
Some severe fighting occurred on the 28th of July, and the resolute
attacks of the enemy were repulsed with great gallantry.

The THIRTY-FOURTH were not engaged on this occasion. On the 30th of
July Marshal Soult moved a strong force against the troops under
Sir Rowland Hill, and a sharp combat took place, in which the
THIRTY-FOURTH were engaged. During this contest Lord Wellington
directed an attack to be made at another part of the enemy’s
line, which proved decisive, and the French were forced to make
a precipitate retreat through the mountains. Five rank and file
of the THIRTY-FOURTH were killed on this occasion; Lieutenant A.
Orrell, one serjeant, and fifteen rank and file wounded.

Lieutenant-General Sir Rowland Hill was directed to pursue the
retreating enemy, on the road to Donna Maria, and about ten o’clock
on the morning of the 31st of July, the French rear-guard was
overtaken beyond Lizasso. The enemy gained a wood on the summit of
the pass, and there facing about, and throwing out a number of
skirmishers, offered formidable resistance; the first brigade of
the British second division was repulsed, and Lieutenant-General
the Honorable William Stewart wounded; when the second brigade,
commanded by Colonel the Honorable R. W. O’Callaghan, was ordered
forward, and the THIRTY-FOURTH took the lead on this occasion.
Passing the retreating troops, and advancing steadily up the
hill, the THIRTY-FOURTH soon gained the edge of the wood, when
the soldiers raised a loud and confident shout, and rushed among
the trees to decide the contest with cold steel; but when the
French saw a line of British bayonets come sparkling through the
foliage, they fled in confusion along a defile, followed by the
THIRTY-FOURTH, who killed and wounded many of the fugitives, and
took some prisoners. The pursuit was not continued above half a
mile, in consequence of a thick fog rendering any further advance
dangerous. The loss of the battalion was limited to two men killed,
thirteen wounded, and two made prisoners.

Brevet Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Worsley received a honorary
distinction for commanding the battalion in the several actions in
the mountains, and the word “PYRENEES” on the regimental colours,
commemorates the distinguished conduct of the officers and soldiers
on this occasion.

The British troops resumed their positions in the Pyrenees,
awaiting the capture of St. Sebastian, and Pampeluna, and the
THIRTY-FOURTH were encamped in Roncesvalles, &c., until the end of
October, when a heavy snow storm obliged the battalion to leave the
mountains.

On the 10th of November, the troops descended from the Pyrenees
by moon-light, to transfer to France the calamities of war, and
the allied army drove the forces of Napoleon from a fortified
position on the river _Nivelle_, capturing many guns and prisoners.
The THIRTY-FOURTH did not sustain any loss on this occasion: they
passed the night in the huts left by the enemy, and afterwards
advanced towards the Nive; but operations were retarded by heavy
rains, and the battalion went into cantonments.

The THIRTY-FOURTH were afterwards honored with the word “NIVELLE”
on their regimental colours, as a mark of royal approbation of
their conduct; and Lieutenant-Colonel Worsley received a second
honorary distinction.

The passage of the _Nive_ river was effected on the 9th of
December; the THIRTY-FOURTH were at their post two hours before
daylight--the stream was nearly five feet deep, and rapid; a mill
stream of equal depth also opposed the advance; and the mill, with
the village beyond the river, were occupied by the enemy; but the
soldiers moved forward in defiance of all opposition, forded the
streams under a sharp fire of musketry, and after some fighting,
in which the THIRTY-FOURTH had one man killed and seven wounded,
the troops established themselves beyond the river; the French
retreating into an intrenched camp in front of Bayonne.

On the following morning, the battalion took post on a ridge
commanding the communication of the right wing with the river Nive;
this wing was in position with its right towards the Adour river,
and its left at Ville Franche, and it was not attacked by the enemy
on the 10th, 11th, or 12th of December; but on the 13th a number
of French corps assailed the troops under Sir Rowland Hill with
great spirit; when the THIRTY-FOURTH maintained their important
post during the day, with the loss of five men wounded. The enemy
was repulsed with severe loss, and pursued to the camp in front of
Bayonne: the brigade to which the THIRTY-FOURTH belonged, followed
the French until it arrived within musket shot of the works, and
took post in a ravine, where it remained until night, when it was
relieved by the third division.

The battalion earned another honorary distinction for its colours
on this occasion, and the word “NIVE” inscribed thereon by royal
authority, commemorates its gallantry; Lieutenant-Colonel Worsley
also received a third distinction.

[Sidenote: 1814]

Leaving their cantonments at the village of St. Pierre, near
Bayonne, the THIRTY-FOURTH advanced, with the troops under
Lieutenant-General Sir Rowland Hill, in the middle of February,
1814, when the French corps under General Harispe, were driven
from Hellete, and afterwards forced from a position in front of
Garris. The THIRTY-FOURTH continued to follow the retreating enemy,
and their gallant bearing on the 27th of February, was afterwards
rewarded with the royal authority to bear the word “ORTHES” on the
regimental colours; Lieutenant-Colonel Worsley also received the
usual honorary distinction conferred on commanding officers of
battalions distinguishing themselves in action.

Pursuing the retreating enemy in the direction of Aire, the
battalion took part in forcing the French to quit that town, where
immense magazines were captured.

The THIRTY-FOURTH were stationed at Aire several days, and
afterwards took part in forcing the French back upon _Toulouse_.
Two or three attempts to throw a bridge of boats across the Garonne
were not attended with success; but the river was eventually
passed, and the enemy driven from his positions on the 10th of
April. On this occasion the troops under Sir Rowland Hill, in whose
column the THIRTY-FOURTH served, drove the enemy from his exterior
works in the suburb, on the left of the Garonne, within the
ancient wall. The THIRTY-FOURTH, under Lieutenant-Colonel Worsley,
took part in forcing the enemy from his redoubts, and from the
houses which he occupied in force, and afterwards formed a lodgment
in the ditch surrounding the suburb. The battalion had two men
killed; Captain James H. Baker mortally wounded; one drummer, and
ten rank and file wounded.

The enemy having quitted Toulouse, the THIRTY-FOURTH moved through
the town, and followed the retiring army some distance; but
hostilities were soon afterwards terminated. Napoleon Bonaparte was
forced to abdicate the imperial throne, and the Bourbon dynasty was
restored to France.

Thus the gallant soldiers of the THIRTY-FOURTH completed their
career of victory and honor; and the British arms triumphed over
the tyrannical power which had sprung out of the French revolution,
and aimed at universal dominion.

The conquering arms of Britain had rescued nations from bondage,
and restored to Europe the blessings of peace. The word “PENINSULA”
on the colours of the THIRTY-FOURTH, commemorates the distinguished
part the second battalion took in the achievement of these splendid
results; and its commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel Worsley,
was afterwards honored with the dignity of Companion of the Order
of the Bath.

The first battalion remained at Secunderabad until the 19th of
June, 1814, when it commenced its march for the island and fortress
of Seringapatam, where it arrived on the 10th of August, and
relieved the first battalion of the Sixty-ninth Regiment.

After reposing in quarters a short time at the city of Toulouse,
the second battalion marched to Bordeaux, where it embarked for
Ireland, on the 17th of July, and landing at Cork, was stationed
at Middleton, Fermoy, &c., until November, when it proceeded to
Dublin, under the command of Major Barlow.

[Sidenote: 1815]

The climate of the garrison of Seringapatam not proving favourable
to the health of the soldiers of the first battalion, they were
moved out of that fortress a short time, and in August, 1815,
commenced their march for Vellore, where they arrived on the 9th of
October.

The second battalion remained in garrison at Dublin, until
September of this year, when it was suddenly ordered to march into
Tipperary, in consequence of the insurrectionary proceedings of the
inhabitants of that part of Ireland.

[Sidenote: 1816]

In February, 1816, thirteen officers, and three hundred and thirty
non-commissioned officers and soldiers, of the first battalion,
proceeded from Vellore to the sea-coast, and were stationed at
Cuddalore six months, for the benefit of their health.

General Sir Eyre Coote was succeeded in the colonelcy of the
regiment by Lieutenant-General the Honorable Sir Galbraith Lowry
Cole, G.C.B., from the Seventieth Foot, by commission, dated the
21st of May, 1816.

[Sidenote: 1817]

The incursions of the barbarous people called _Pindarees_, who
infested the British territory in India at this period, and
committed dreadful ravages wherever they appeared, occasioned the
first battalion to take the field early in 1817, when it left a
detachment at Vellore, under Lieutenant-Colonel Worsley, and joined
the division commanded by Major-General Browne, assembled to guard
the passes near Naggerry. In February the battalion returned to
Vellore.

In the mean time, the peace of Europe appearing to be established
upon sound and durable principles, the second battalion was ordered
to be reduced, which took place in April, 1817, when the following
brigade order was issued:--

“Major-General Doyle having received the warrant for the
disbandment of the second battalion of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment,
and carried the orders of the commander of the forces into effect,
it now only remains for the major-general to express, in the most
unqualified manner, his perfect approbation of the sober, orderly,
and soldier-like conduct of the corps in quarters, for a period of
upwards of one year and a half, during which it has been under his
immediate command.

“Major-General Doyle feels it his duty as well as inclination to
mark particularly the zeal and attention with which Major Barlow
has conducted the discipline of the corps, and in which he has
been ably supported by the officers under his command, and in case
the service should be deprived of so valuable an officer, the
major-general trusts it may be only for a short time.

“The major-general requests the commanding officer will convey
to the officers, non-commissioned officers, and privates, his
best thanks, and his good wishes for their individual welfare.
He is confident that the uniform good conduct, for which the
THIRTY-FOURTH have always been conspicuous, both in the field and
in quarters, will be the same, in whatever part of His Majesty’s
dominions the service of the corps may be required.”

[Sidenote: 1818]

At this period a confederacy of the native princes in India was
formed against the British authority, and extensive preparations
for war were made by the coalesced Mahratta States. Their designs
were partly discovered and disconcerted by the governor-general,
the Marquis of Hastings; but hostilities could not be avoided, and
the British took the field for the preservation of their territory
from unjust aggression. On this occasion the flank companies of
the THIRTY-FOURTH, mustering eight officers, eight serjeants, six
drummers, and two hundred rank and file, under the command of
Captain Tew, marched from Vellore, to the frontiers, and joining a
division of the army assembling for field service at Adoni, were
formed in a flank battalion, with the companies of the Sixty-ninth
and Eighty-fourth Regiments. This battalion penetrated the southern
Mahratta country, with the division under Brigadier-General Munro,
to whom the fortresses of _Dummul_, _Kooshgúl_, and _Darwar_
surrendered in succession; and the division halted during the rainy
season at Darwar, where the flank companies of the Fifty-third
joined the flank battalion, which was commanded by Major Giles.
Leaving Darwar in October, the division penetrated the Sundoor
valley, and afterwards advanced into the interior of the southern
Mahratta country, Brigadier-General Pritzler commanding. The
division skirmished with the enemy at _Bejapoor_; and overtook the
rear of the Peishwa’s army at the _Salpée Pass_, on the 8th of
January, 1818, when the Mahratta troops fled in every direction,
over a difficult country, which prevented any great loss being
inflicted on them. The division pursued by forced marches, under a
burning sun, until the Peishwa’s army separated, and passing the
flanks, marched to the north.

The battalion companies were relieved from garrison duty at
Vellore, and proceeding to Bangalore, joined a division of the
field force, on the banks of the Toombudra, under Major-General
Long, and remained at this station during part of the Mahratta and
Pindaree war; but suffering severely from dysentery, they were
removed into garrison at Bellary.

Meanwhile the flank companies had joined part of the Bombay army;
but after the surrender of the hill-fort of _Sattarah_ they
separated from that force, and again proceeded, with the division
under Brigadier-General Pritzler, to the Salpée Pass, taking
part in the siege and capture of the hill-fort of _Singhur_,
the reduction of the fortified pagoda and village of _Sassoor_,
the hill-forts of _Uizaghur_, and _Poorunder_, and afterwards
returning through the pass, the operations of the division were
followed by the surrender of a number of small fortified places.
Then proceeding by Sattarah to the western ghauts and forests,
the division captured the hill-fort of _Woossottah_, restored the
family of Sevajée to its ancient dignity, and joining the division
under Brigadier-General Munro, took part in the defeat of a body
of hostile troops at _Sholapoor_, the capture of the enemy’s
artillery, and the reduction of the fortress, which surrendered
on the 15th of May. The flank companies of the THIRTY-FOURTH
distinguished themselves on the 10th of May, and a gallant charge
made by them greatly contributed to the capture of the enemy’s
artillery.

After forcing the fortress of Nepaunee to capitulate, the division
was cantoned, during the remainder of the year, at Hoobly, where
the soldiers suffered from cholera.

In September the battalion companies left Bellary for Bangalore,
and being attacked by cholera on the march, lost thirty-seven men
in nine days.

[Sidenote: 1819]

Quitting Hoobly in the beginning of 1819, the flank companies
proceeded to Belgaum, and after taking part in several movements,
they were engaged in the siege of the hill-fort of _Copaul Droog_,
which was invested on the 10th of May, and captured by assault
three days afterwards, after an obstinate resistance from the
enemy. The following paragraph appeared in general orders, dated
Madras, 22nd June, 1819.

“The conduct of three troops of His Majesty’s Twenty-second
Light Dragoons, with the Artillery troop under Captain Mills, and
the flank battalion commanded by Captain TEW, of His Majesty’s
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, employed during the siege of CAPAUL DROOG,
was such as to draw from me, (Brigadier-General Pritzler), the
highest encomiums, particularly that of the Artillery troops of
the Twenty-second Dragoons, which served in the batteries, and the
flank battalion which protected the batteries, and led the assault
of the place, in which the services of Captains TEW, THIRTY-FOURTH;
Cuppaidge, Fifty-third; Jenour and Jones, Sixty-ninth Regiment; and
Lieutenant Silver, Fifty-third, were most conspicuous.”

The flank companies of the THIRTY-FOURTH were again stationed at
Belgaum, until October, when they marched, with a small native
force, against _Sanglee_, which place they forced to submit, and
afterwards returned to Belgaum.

[Sidenote: 1820]

On the 25th of May, 1820, the head-quarters and battalion companies
of the regiment marched from Bangalore, on route for Madras, where
they arrived on the 2nd of July, and were joined by the flank
companies from Belgaum on the 29th of December. These companies
had been absent three years and eight months, and had lost one
subaltern and eighty-one rank and file. On the breaking up of the
flank battalion, it was stated in orders,--

“From the period of the battalion joining the force to the present
Colonel Pritzler has, in no instance, had the slightest cause of
complaint, and has never had occasion to bring a non-commissioned
officer or private to a court-martial; but he has had frequent
opportunities of bearing testimony of the excellent conduct of
this corps, which has been equally conspicuous for its gallantry
in the field, as for its order and regularity in camp, and which
he attributes to the unwearied attention of Major Giles, and the
officers under his command, and to the excellent disposition and
discipline of the non-commissioned officers and soldiers. Colonel
Pritzler cannot therefore, but regret the departure of the corps
from under his command.

“It has frequently fallen to Captain TEW to command the battalion,
in the absence of Major Giles on other duties, which gave him an
opportunity of showing that he was, in every way, competent to fill
the situation, with great credit to himself and advantage to His
Majesty’s service.”

The conduct of the battalion was also commended in general orders,
by Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Hislop, Bart., G.C.B.

[Sidenote: 1821]

On the departure of the regiment from Madras, for Wallajabad, in
1821, when arrangements were in progress for its return to England,
it was stated in general orders,--

“The Honorable the Governor cannot permit His Majesty’s
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment to quit the garrison without expressing
his entire approbation of the discipline and exemplary conduct
manifested, on all occasions, by the officers, non-commissioned
officers, and soldiers of that corps, ever since its arrival
at Fort St. George, now a period of nearly two years, and his
Excellency requests Lieutenant-Colonel Dickens, and the officers
under his command, to accept his best thanks for the very
satisfactory manner in which they have performed their respective
duties.”

[Sidenote: 1822]

[Sidenote: 1823]

During the year 1822 the regiment was stationed at Wallajabad;
and in January, 1823, it returned to Madras, preparatory to its
embarkation for England. The prompt and active exertions of the
corps on the breaking out of a fire in the Company’s stores, on
the 7th of January, preserved property to a considerable amount.

Five hundred and thirty-seven non-commissioned officers and
soldiers having volunteered to remain in India, and transfer their
services to other corps, the remainder of the regiment, amounting
to one hundred and sixteen officers and soldiers, embarked on board
the Company’s ship “Coldstream,” on the 9th of March, and sailed
for England under Lieutenant-Colonel Dickens. The regiment called
at St. Helena, where it remained about a week, and arrived in the
river Thames, in the early part of July, after an absence from
England of upwards of twenty-three years, landed at Gravesend, from
whence it marched to Chatham, where the establishment was fixed at
six hundred and fifty officers and soldiers.

The depôt joined from Portsmouth on the 19th of July; recruiting
parties were sent to various towns in the United Kingdom: and in
December the regiment marched to Windsor.

[Sidenote: 1824]

After remaining two months at Windsor the regiment proceeded
to Portsmouth, where it embarked for Ireland in May, 1824, and
landing at Dublin, marched to Enniskillen, sending detachments to
Maguires-bridge, Cavan, Killishandra, Kings-court, and Bally James
Duff.

[Sidenote: 1825]

In the summer of 1825 the regiment proceeded to Boyle, and
furnished nine detachments to stations in that part of the country;
in August the head-quarters were removed to Longford, and in
October to Athlone. At this period the establishment was augmented
to eight hundred and thirty-six officers and soldiers, and the
regiment was divided into six service and four depôt companies: but
the service companies did not proceed abroad at this period.

[Sidenote: 1826]

From Athlone the regiment marched to Dublin, in May, 1826; and
furnished a detachment of grenadiers to Hacketstown, to mount guard
at the residence of the Lord-Lieutenant, during his stay in that
part of the country.

Lieutenant-General the Honorable Sir G. Lowry Cole, G.C.B., was
removed to the Twenty-seventh, or the Inniskilling Regiment, of
Foot, and was succeeded in the colonelcy of the THIRTY-FOURTH, by
Lieutenant-General Sir Thomas Makdougall Brisbane, Bart, G.C.B.,
G.C.H., by commission, dated the 16th of December, 1826.

[Sidenote: 1827]

[Sidenote: 1828]

After remaining twelve months at Dublin, the head-quarters
were removed to Templemore, in May, 1827, and in September to
Galway, furnishing twelve detachments to military stations in
that neighbourhood. In April, 1828, the regiment was removed to
Buttevant; and in July to Cork.

[Sidenote: 1829]

During the six years which had elapsed from the date of the arrival
of the regiment from India, it had recruited its ranks and attained
a state of discipline and efficiency, and its turn to proceed
abroad having arrived in August, 1829, the service companies
embarked from Cork for North America; they sailed in two divisions,
the first under Major the Honorable H. S. Fane, and the second
under Captain Tew, and arriving at Nova Scotia in October, landed
at Halifax, where they remained nine months.

[Sidenote: 1830]

In July, 1830, the head-quarters were removed from Halifax to Fort
Charlotte, and detachments were sent to Prince Edward’s Island,
Annapolis, Windsor, York Redoubt, Sydney, Cape Breton, and St.
Andrews, New Brunswick.

[Sidenote: 1832]

The regiment remained detached until August, 1832, when the
head-quarters, consisting of one field officer, two captains, five
subalterns, two staff, twenty-three serjeants, nine drummers, and
three hundred and sixty-seven rank and file, embarked on board
His Majesty’s ship “Winchester” for New Brunswick, disembarked
at St. John’s, and proceeded to Fredericton, having left at the
former station one field officer, one captain, two subalterns, six
serjeants, one drummer, and a hundred and seven rank and file,
which followed them on the 1st of September, in His Majesty’s brig
“Arachne,” and arrived at St. John’s, New Brunswick, on the 4th
September, 1832.

[Sidenote: 1834]

In 1834, on retiring from the command of the regiment,
Lieutenant-Colonel Richard Kelly presented to the officers’ mess, a
handsome snuff-box.

Lieutenant-Colonel Kelly was succeeded in the command of the
regiment by Lieutenant-Colonel the Honorable Henry Fane.

[Sidenote: 1835]

The regiment remained in New Brunswick until July, 1835, when it
returned in two divisions to Halifax.

[Sidenote: 1836]

In May, 1836, detachments were sent to Cape Breton, Annapolis, York
Redoubt, and Prince Edward’s Island.

In this year, the red and white tuft, which had been previously
worn by the battalion companies, was allowed by the following
letter to be resumed.

      “_Horse Guards, 23rd May, 1836._

  “SIR,

  “I have the honor, by direction of the General Commanding in
  Chief, to acquaint you, in reply to your letter, of the 4th of
  March last, that the King has been graciously pleased to approve
  of the battalion companies of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment resuming
  the tuft worn by those companies, in commemoration of the action
  at Arroyo de los Molinos, on the 28th of October, 1811.

        “I have &c.,
        “(Signed) JOHN MACDONALD, A. G.

  “_Lieutenant-Colonel Honorable H. S. Fane_,
  “_Commanding 34th Regiment_.”


[Sidenote: 1837]

The two flank companies, consisting of two captains, two
subalterns, eight serjeants, two drummers, and one hundred and
fifty rank and file, marched, under Captain Byron, for New
Brunswick, 19th December, 1837.

On the 24th and 25th of December, they marched from St. John’s,
New Brunswick, for Quebec, Lower Canada; they were conveyed on the
ice of the St. John river, to the junction of the river Madawaska
with the St. John, then up the river to the head of the Timiscouta
Lake, in two-horse sleighs, each sleigh carrying eight men, with
their arms and accoutrements: from the head of the Lake Timiscouta,
they were conveyed in carioles, two men with their arms, &c., in
each, across the Portage to the river St. Lawrence, and on reaching
the village of St. André, they followed the course of the river
to Point Levi, opposite Quebec, where they crossed in canoes,
having suffered little from the severity of the weather, and the
inhabitants aiding their progress in every way. The few men left at
different places sick, were treated with every kindness, and were
all sufficiently recovered to proceed with the head-quarters on
their marching up, except two men left at Fredericton, but whose
complaints were quite unconnected with the exposure of the march.

On the regiment being ordered to proceed to Canada, the following
general order was issued by his Excellency Major-General Sir Colin
Campbell, K.C.B., &c., Lieutenant Governor of Nova Scotia.

  “(General order.)
      “_Head-Quarters_,
      “_Halifax, N. S., 8th January, 1838._

  “The Major-General commanding cannot allow the THIRTY-FOURTH
  Regiment to quit the command, without expressing his perfect
  satisfaction with the discipline and regularity with which the
  corps has uniformly conducted itself; and his Excellency desires
  that Major Ruxton will convey to the officers and soldiers, under
  his command, his best wishes for their future welfare, assured as
  he is, that in whatever service the corps may be employed, they
  will continue to display those qualities which have secured to
  them so high a character as soldiers.

        “(Signed)      J. S. SNODGRASS,
                       “_A. D. A. General_.”


This year the regiment lost a valuable officer, MAJOR MARK MCLEOD
TEW, whose many excellent qualities occasioned him to be highly
esteemed by the officers and soldiers of his corps. He entered
the regiment as ensign in 1800, was promoted lieutenant in the
same year, captain in 1809, major by brevet in 1830, and major in
the regiment in 1837. His distinguished services with the flank
battalion, during the Mahratta and Pindaree war, from 1817 to
1820, are set forth in the record of his regiment. The state of
his health occasioned him to retire from the service in August,
1837; but his decease occurred in October, at Halifax, Nova Scotia,
before he could embark for England.

In transmitting to his brother, Captain J. McLeod Tew,
Twenty-second Regiment, an account of his effects, &c., Captain
E. Broderick expressed himself in the following affectionate
terms:--“One of the snuff-boxes found among his effects, has been
retained by the officers, as a memento of him who had been so
long the father of the regiment, and who was so deservedly loved
and respected by us all: it is a wooden box, presented to him by
Mr. Markham, which the officers intend to place in a case, with a
suitable inscription.

“The officers intend to erect a monument to our respected friend,
to be placed in one of the churches. The men of the regiment have
also subscribed to the erection of this monument, and I can assure
you, that every officer and soldier feels that in your late brother
he has lost a friend.”

[Sidenote: 1838]

On the 8th January, 1838, the head-quarters, and remaining four
companies, consisting of one field officer, three captains, four
subalterns, three staff, twenty-two serjeants, eight drummers,
and two hundred and eighty-one rank and file, under Major Ruxton,
embarked in Her Majesty’s ship “Cornwallis,” and sailed the
following day for St. John’s, New Brunswick, where they landed on
the 14th of the same month.

The regiment marched from St. John’s for Quebec by companies,
which were conveyed in the same manner as the flank companies had
been, and were equally fortunate in escaping without casualties of
any importance; they reached Quebec on the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 7th
February.

The flank companies and Nos. 1 and 2, were detached to Three
Rivers: they took part in various movements made in the disturbed
districts, adjoining the river Richelieu; and were quartered in
different villages in the neighbourhood.

The regiment next moved by detachments to Montreal. The
head-quarters then proceeded to Kingston, but were not disembarked
there, proceeding on to Toronto, where they arrived on the 4th of
June. In July the head-quarters, under Lieutenant-Colonel Airey,
proceeded to Amherstberg.

In December a company, consisting of one captain, two subalterns,
three serjeants, and fifty rank and file, under Captain Broderick,
proceeded to Sandwich, in expectation of that place being attacked
by brigands from the state of Michigan, from whence it returned on
the 25th of that month.

[Sidenote: 1840]

The regiment remained at Amherstburg until May, 1840, when it
returned in three divisions to Toronto, detaching three companies
to Kingston, at which station it remained until May, 1841, when the
head-quarters moved to Montreal.

[Sidenote: 1841]

On the 31st May, 1841, orders having been received for the return
of the regiment to England, four serjeants, nine corporals, two
drummers, and two hundred and one privates, volunteered to serve
permanently in North America.

At Montreal, the head-quarters were joined by the left wing on the
3rd June, 1841, and on the 20th of that month the regiment, under
the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Airey, sailed from Quebec in the
“Cornwall” transport for England, where it arrived on the 22nd
July, 1841, and landed at Gosport and occupied Forton Barracks.
In September, the head-quarters moved over to Portsmouth, where
they remained until August, 1842, during which time the efficiency
of the regiment, which had been impaired, to a certain degree, by
the number of recruits which had taken the place of those who had
volunteered to remain in Canada, was completely restored.

[Sidenote: 1842]

On the 13th August, 1842, the regiment received a sudden order at
half-past seven o’clock P.M., to proceed to London by an early
train the following morning. Accordingly, on the 14th of August,
the head-quarters, consisting of one lieutenant-colonel, one major,
nine captains, ten subalterns, three staff, twenty-seven serjeants,
eleven drummers, and five hundred and twenty-four rank and file,
left Portsmouth at eight A.M., and proceeding by the South Western
Railway to London, arrived at the Nine Elms Station, marched to
the Birmingham Railway Station, and proceeded forthwith to Weedon,
where it arrived at twelve at night; sudden disturbances in the
manufacturing districts were the cause of this unexpected movement.

On the 16th August, three companies left Weedon for the disturbed
districts, and on the 17th two more companies proceeded in the
same direction. These were detached at Newcastle-under-Lyme,
Wolverhampton, and Stafford; other companies were detached to
Birmingham, and during the autumn of 1842, the head-quarters were
moved to Northampton, all the ten companies being on detachment at
Newcastle-under-Lyme, Burslem, Hanley, Stafford, Wolverhampton,
Bilston, Birmingham, and Coventry.

The companies were subsequently withdrawn from Bilston and
Stafford; but the others remained as above described until the
4th August, when the entire regiment was collected together
at Weedon. At this period the strength of the regiment was as
follows, viz:--One colonel, one lieutenant-colonel, two majors, ten
captains, twelve lieutenants, eight ensigns, one paymaster, one
adjutant, one quartermaster, one surgeon, one assistant-surgeon,
forty-seven serjeants, fourteen drummers, and eight hundred and one
rank and file.

[Sidenote: 1843]

During the year 1843, political agitation was carried to such an
extent in Ireland, as to induce Her Majesty’s Government to take
measures for putting down the demonstrations of physical force
which had been made in that country.

For this purpose, additional corps were ordered from Great Britain
to Ireland. The THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, on this emergency, was
ordered on the 4th of October to be removed by railroad to
Liverpool. The regiment quitted its station at Weedon early in the
morning of the 6th of October, and arrived at Liverpool on the
same day. It was embarked on the afternoon of the 7th of October
in steam-vessels for Dublin, where it arrived on the following
morning, and being disembarked, it marched to Clontarf[16] (a
village situated about two miles from the capital, on the Bay
of Dublin), where a numerous public meeting had been advertised
to be held, but which was prohibited by Government proclamation
as illegal. A large body of troops had been concentrated in the
neighbourhood in apprehension of a breach of the peace; but the
assemblage having separated without disturbance, the troops
returned to their quarters in the evening.

[Sidenote: 1844]

The regiment remains in Dublin at the period to which this record
is brought.

The foregoing pages record the bravery, endurance, and uniformly
good conduct of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, both at home and
abroad: its early services during the wars in Spain and Flanders
in the reign of Queen Anne; its subsequent achievements on various
expeditions in Europe, Africa, America, and the West Indies; its
employment, for a period exceeding twenty years, in the East
Indies; and its gallantry in Portugal, Spain, and France, to the
conclusion of the Peninsular War in 1814, afford the best proofs
of the zealous and honorable conduct of its officers and men,
who, under severe trials, have evinced a steady adherence to the
rules of discipline, and a gallant bearing whenever they have been
brought into contact with the enemies of their country: nor has
the conduct of the regiment been less conspicuous on home, than on
foreign, service; but has been, at all times, such as to merit the
approbation of the Sovereign, and the gratitude of the kingdom.

[Illustration: THIRTY-FOURTH (THE CUMBERLAND) REGIMENT OF FOOT.

(Uniform of Private Soldiers in 1844)

(_To face page 78._)]


FOOTNOTES:

[6] “About nine o’clock in the morning, the enemy made an attack
with a body of foot, supported by two bodies of horse, on the
weakest and most westerly part of the outworks, and where were only
one hundred English of HAMILTON’s (THIRTY-FOURTH) Regiment, who had
that very morning come upon duty, from travelling forty leagues in
the two foregoing days, upon mules; notwithstanding all which, they
fairly repulsed the enemy.” _Journal of the Siege of Barcelona._

[7] BOYER’s _Annals of Queen Anne_.

[8] Afterwards colonel of the regiment.

[9] _History of Scotland_ by Sir WALTER SCOTT, Bart.

[10] Strength of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment at the battle of
Culloden, 16th April, 1746:

2 field officers, 7 captains, 15 subalterns, 21 serjeants, 15
drummers, and 399 rank and file--459 total.

[11] On being appointed to the colonelcy of the regiment in 1760,
Lord Frederick Cavendish presented to the officers’ mess two
handsome silver vases, which still ornament the mess-table of the
corps.

[12] BEATSON’s _Naval and Military Memoirs_.

[13] On the 22nd January, 1796, Private John Perry was promoted to
serjeant for gallant conduct before the enemy.

[14] In this year Lieutenant-Colonel Cunyngham presented a handsome
silver side dish to the officers’ mess, which is still in their
possession.

[15] The brass drums and the drum-major’s staff of the FRENCH
THIRTY-FOURTH REGIMENT were captured on this occasion, and are
now used by the British THIRTY-FOURTH REGIMENT; and Serjeant
Moses Simpson, the individual who actually took the staff from
the drum-major of the French Thirty-fourth Regiment, is, at the
period of completing this historical record, (September, 1843,)
in the situation of barrack-serjeant at Northampton, and has been
presented by the officers of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment with a
handsome medal, in commemoration of his gallant conduct.

[16] The “Conquer Hill” of Clontarf is celebrated in Irish history
as the scene of a victory gained by the Irish over the Danes.




SUCCESSION OF COLONELS

OF THE

THIRTY-FOURTH,

OR,

THE CUMBERLAND REGIMENT

OF

FOOT.


ROBERT LORD LUCAS.

_Appointed 12th February, 1702._

ROBERT LORD LUCAS was distinguished for his attachment to the
interests of civil and religious liberty; and at the revolution
in 1688, when King James II. had fled in disguise, and London was
in great confusion, his Lordship was nominated, by a committee
assembled for the preservation of tranquillity, to take the charge
of the Tower. This appointment was confirmed to Lord Lucas by King
William III., who gave his Lordship a commission of Governor of the
Tower of London.

LORD LUCAS entered the army, and served under King William in
Flanders; and he was promoted to the lieutenant-colonelcy of the
Thirteenth Regiment, commanded by Sir John Jacobs. On the breaking
out of the war of the Spanish succession, his Lordship took great
interest in raising a regiment of foot, now the THIRTY-FOURTH, of
which he was appointed colonel by King William, in February, 1702.

Queen Anne superseded his Lordship’s commission as Governor of the
Tower, and appointed the Earl of Abingdon to that dignity, with the
title of Constable.

LORD LUCAS retained the colonelcy of his regiment until his
decease, on the 31st of January, 1705; when the dignity of BARON
LUCAS of Shenfield, in Essex, became extinct.


HANS HAMILTON.

_Appointed 1st February, 1705._

HANS HAMILTON served in the wars of King William III., and
acquired the reputation of a brave and meritorious officer: he was
afterwards nominated to the lieutenant-colonelcy of the Earl of
Derby’s Regiment, now Sixteenth Foot, with which corps he proceeded
to the Netherlands in the summer of 1701. He served under the
celebrated JOHN DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH, during the campaigns of 1702
and 1703, in the Netherlands, and also in Germany in 1704, when
the victories at Schellenberg and Blenheim exalted the reputation
of the British arms. In February, 1705, he was rewarded with
the colonelcy of the THIRTY-FOURTH; and in the same year he was
nominated quartermaster-general to the expedition to Spain, under
General the Earl of Peterborough, and he served at the capture of
Barcelona; also in other important transactions until 1706. He
subsequently proceeded to Flanders, and having been promoted to the
rank of brigadier-general in 1710, he commanded a brigade, under
the Duke of Marlborough, during the campaign of 1711, when the
enemy’s celebrated lines were passed at Arleux, and the fortress
of Bouchain was besieged and captured. In 1713 he was removed to
the Sixteenth Regiment, with which corps his early services were
connected: and in 1715 he was succeeded by Richard Viscount Irwing.
He died on the 24th of October, 1721.


THOMAS CHUDLEIGH.

_Appointed 30th November, 1712._

The early services of Colonel CHUDLEIGH were connected with the
Sixteenth Regiment of Foot, with which corps he served with
reputation, under the celebrated JOHN DUKE OF MARLBOROUGH, and his
meritorious conduct was rewarded with the lieutenant-colonelcy of
his regiment; from which he was promoted in 1712, to the colonelcy
of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, with which corps he proceeded to
Ireland in 1717. In 1723, he retired from the service, selling his
commission. He died on the 14th of April, 1726.


ROBERT HAYES.

_Appointed 18th February, 1723._

This officer served in the First Foot Guards, in which corps
he rose to the rank of captain and lieutenant-colonel, and in
February, 1723, he obtained the colonelcy of the THIRTY-FOURTH
Regiment, by purchase. He proceeded with his regiment to the relief
of Gibraltar, when that fortress was besieged by the Spaniards, in
1727: and subsequently sailed from Gibraltar in command of a body
of troops, for Jamaica; where he died on the 7th of April, 1731.


STEPHEN CORNWALLIS.

_Appointed 8th January, 1732._

STEPHEN CORNWALLIS was appointed to a commission in the Second
Foot Guards, in March, 1719; and in 1723, he was promoted captain
in the Ninth Dragoons; he was afterwards nominated captain and
lieutenant-colonel in the Third Foot Guards, and procured the
colonelcy of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment in 1732: in 1738 he was
removed to the Eleventh Foot. On the commencement of the war with
Spain in 1739, he was promoted to the rank of brigadier-general,
and in 1742 he accompanied the army to Flanders, under
Field-Marshal the Earl of Stair: in February, 1743, he was promoted
to the rank of major-general. He died in Germany, in May, 1743; at
which period he was a member of parliament for Eye.


LORD JAMES CAVENDISH.

_Appointed 1st November, 1738._

LORD JAMES CAVENDISH, second son of William (second) Duke of
Devonshire, was many years an officer in the Third Foot Guards, in
which corps he rose to the rank of captain and lieutenant-colonel
in 1730, and in 1738, he was promoted to the colonelcy of the
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment: he was a member of parliament for Molton.
His decease occurred in November, 1741.


THE HONORABLE JAMES CHOLMONDELEY.

_Appointed 18th December, 1742._

THE HONORABLE JAMES CHOLMONDELEY, third son of George (second)
Earl of Cholmondeley, obtained the commission of guidon and major
in the Second Troop, now Second Regiment, of Life Guards, in 1725;
in 1731, he was nominated lieutenant and lieutenant-colonel in
the third troop of Life Guards; and in 1741 he was promoted to
the colonelcy of the Forty-eighth, from which he was removed, in
1742, to the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment. Accompanying his regiment
to Flanders in 1744, he served the campaign of that year, under
Field-Marshal Wade. He was at the battle of Fontenoy in 1745; and
was afterwards promoted to the rank of brigadier-general. On the
breaking out of the rebellion in Scotland, he returned to England
with a brigade of infantry, and afterwards took the charge of two
battalions which had arrived from Ireland, with which he joined the
army under Field-Marshal Wade. On the flight of the rebels from
Derby, he was detached to Scotland; and he commanded a brigade of
infantry at the battle of Falkirk, on the 17th of January, 1746,
when he highly distinguished himself; but the excessive fatigue he
underwent, with continued exposure to severe weather, deprived him
of the use of his limbs for some time. In 1747, he was promoted
to the rank of major-general; and he was removed in 1749, to the
Twelfth Dragoons. He was again removed, in November of the same
year, to the Third Irish Horse (now Sixth Dragoon Guards); and in
1750, to the Sixth Dragoons. In 1754, he was promoted to the rank
of lieutenant-general; and he was many years lieutenant-governor of
Chester. He died in 1775.


THE HONORABLE HENRY SEYMOUR CONWAY.

_Appointed 24th July, 1749._

THE HONORABLE HENRY SEYMOUR CONWAY, second son of Lord Conway,
and brother of Francis Earl of Hertford, was appointed lieutenant
in the First Foot Guards in 1737, captain and lieutenant-colonel
in 1741, and in 1746 he was appointed aide-de-camp to the Duke of
Cumberland, and promoted to the colonelcy of the Fifty-ninth (now
Forty-eighth) Foot. He was removed to the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment in
1749, to the Thirteenth Dragoons in 1751, and to the Fourth Horse
(now Eighth Dragoon Guards) in 1754. In 1756 he was promoted to the
rank of major-general, and in 1759 to that of lieutenant-general:
he was removed to the Royal Dragoons in the same year. He commanded
a division of the allied army in Germany, under Prince Ferdinand of
Brunswick, in 1761; and the British forces in Germany were placed
under his orders during the absence of the Marquis of Granby. He
was also one of the grooms of the bedchamber to His Majesty, and
a member of parliament; and having voted against ministers on the
great question of military warrants, in 1764, he resigned his court
appointment and military commands; but in 1768 he was appointed
colonel of the Fourth Dragoons. In 1770 he was removed to the Royal
Regiment of Horse Guards; in 1772, he was promoted to the rank of
general; in 1782, he was appointed commander-in-chief of the army,
and in 1793 he was promoted to the rank of field-marshal. He died
in 1795; at which period he was eldest general officer and first
field-marshal in the army.


CHARLES RUSSELL.

_Appointed 17th December, 1751._

CHARLES RUSSELL was many years an officer in the Foot Guards; he
rose to the rank of captain and lieutenant-colonel in the First
Regiment, and was promoted to major, with the rank of colonel,
in the Second, or Coldstream, Regiment, in 1745; in 1751 he was
nominated colonel of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment of Foot. He died on
the 20th November, 1754.


THOMAS EARL OF EFFINGHAM.

_Appointed 2nd December, 1754._

LORD THOMAS HOWARD succeeded to the title of Earl of Effingham in
February, 1743, and on the 11th of April following he was nominated
lieutenant-colonel in the Second Troop, now Second Regiment,
of Life Guards. In 1749 he was appointed one of His Majesty’s
aides-de-camp, with the rank of colonel; and in 1754 he obtained
the colonelcy of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment. His lordship was
promoted to the rank of major-general in 1758; and was removed to
the colonelcy of the First Troop of Horse Grenadier Guards in 1760.
His decease occurred in November, 1763.


LORD FREDERICK CAVENDISH.

_Appointed 30th October, 1760._

LORD FREDERICK CAVENDISH, third son of William (third) Duke of
Devonshire, was honored with having the Prince of Wales, (father
of King George III.,) for his godfather. Choosing the profession
of arms, he entered the army as ensign in the First Foot Guards,
and was appointed lieutenant and captain in the Second Foot
Guards in 1752; in 1755 he was nominated lieutenant-colonel of
the Twenty-ninth Regiment; he was honored with the appointment
of aide-de-camp to King George II., with the rank of colonel, in
1758, and in 1759 he obtained the colonelcy of the Sixty-seventh
Regiment, from which he was removed in 1760 to the THIRTY-FOURTH.
He was promoted to the rank of major-general in 1761,--to that of
lieutenant-general in 1770,--general in 1782,--and field-marshal in
1796. In 1797 he resigned the colonelcy of his regiment. He died in
October, 1803.


GEORGE FERDINAND LORD SOUTHAMPTON.

_Appointed 13th July, 1797._

THE HONORABLE GEORGE FERDINAND FITZROY, eldest son of Charles
(first) Lord Southampton, son of the Duke of Grafton, was appointed
captain in the Forty-first Regiment on the 25th of December, 1787,
and was promoted to the majority of the Fifty-first Foot on the
25th of April, 1792; in February, 1793, he was advanced to the
commission of captain and lieutenant-colonel in the Second Foot
Guards, and he received the brevet rank of colonel in May, 1796. On
the decease of his father in March, 1797, he succeeded to the title
of LORD SOUTHAMPTON; and in July following he was nominated colonel
of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment. His lordship obtained the rank of
major-general in 1801, and of lieutenant-general in 1808. He died
in June, 1810.


SIR EYRE COOTE, G.C.B.

_Appointed 25th June, 1810._

This officer was appointed ensign in the Thirty-seventh Regiment
on the 15th of April, 1774, and proceeding to North America at the
commencement of the American war, he had repeated opportunities of
distinguishing himself. He served at the capture of Long Island,
and carried the regimental colour of his corps at the battle of
Brooklyn, on the 27th of August, 1776. He also served at the
capture of New York, and at the reduction of Fort Washington, and
subsequently accompanied the expedition to Rhode Island; in the
same year he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant. He proceeded
with the expedition to Pennsylvania, and served at the battles of
Brandywine and Germantown, in 1777, and of Monmouth in 1778; also
at the reduction of Mud Island. On the 10th of August, 1778, he
was promoted to captain of a company in his regiment, in which
rank he was present at the attack of Washington’s dragoons, in New
Jersey. He proceeded with the expedition to South Carolina, and
served at the siege of Charlestown, in 1780. He also shared in
the fatigues, privations, and engagements of the campaign, under
Major-General Earl Cornwallis, in the Carolinas and in Virginia,
and was made prisoner at the surrender of York Town, on the 18th
of October, 1781. On being liberated, Captain Coote returned to
England, and was appointed major of the Forty-seventh Regiment
in February, 1783. After serving five years in Ireland, he was
nominated lieutenant-colonel of the Seventieth, in March, 1788; and
in 1793 he was selected to command the first battalion of light
infantry, in the expedition to the West Indies, under General
Sir Charles (afterwards Earl) Grey, who captured the islands of
Martinique, St. Lucia, and Guadaloupe. Lieutenant-Colonel Coote had
opportunities of distinguishing himself at the reduction of these
colonies, and being afterwards sent to England with despatches,
he was nominated aide-de-camp to King George III., with the rank
of colonel, in 1795. In 1796 he was appointed brigadier-general
on the staff of Ireland; in 1798 he was promoted to the rank of
major-general, and removed to the staff of South Britain; and after
commanding at Dover a short period, he proceeded to Flanders, in
charge of an expedition for the destruction of the sluices and
works of the canal near Ostend, which was accomplished; but before
the troops could re-embark, they were attacked by superior numbers,
and forced to surrender. Major-General Coote was wounded on this
occasion. After his exchange, he returned to his command at Dover.
In 1799 he commanded a brigade in the expedition to Holland, under
his Royal Highness the Duke of York; and after the return of the
army, he resumed the command of the troops at Dover. In 1800 he
proceeded with the expedition against Ferrol, and when the attack
on that fortress was relinquished, he joined the armament in
the Mediterranean, and accompanied General Sir Ralph Abercromby
to Egypt. He commanded the leading division of the army which
effected a landing in the Bay of Aboukir, on the 8th of March,
1801, and distinguished himself on that occasion, for which he
was thanked, in orders, by Sir Ralph Abercromby. He commanded a
brigade in the actions before Alexandria, and when the advance to
Cairo was undertaken, he was left in command of the troops before
Alexandria. After taking a distinguished part in delivering Egypt
from the power of France, he returned to England, where he received
the thanks of both houses of parliament, the approbation of his
Sovereign, and was honored with the dignity of Knight of the Bath,
and the first class of the Turkish Order of the Crescent.

On the 1st of January, 1805, Sir Eyre Coote was promoted to the
rank of lieutenant-general, and nominated lieutenant-governor of
Jamaica, where he resided upwards of three years. Returning to
England, he was appointed to the command of a division of the army
sent, in the summer of 1809, against Holland, under the Earl of
Chatham. He was appointed colonel of the Sixty-second Regiment in
1806, and removed to the THIRTY-FOURTH in 1810: in 1814, he was
promoted to the rank of general. He was removed from the service on
the 21st May, 1816.


THE HONORABLE SIR GALBRAITH LOWRY COLE, G.C.B.

_Appointed 21st May, 1816._

THE HONORABLE GALBRAITH LOWRY COLE, son of the Earl of Enniskillen,
entered the army a short time before the commencement of the French
revolutionary war, and the contest which followed afforded him
frequent opportunities for the display of professional ability.
He was appointed captain in the Seventieth Foot, on the 30th of
November, 1792, major of the Hundred and Second regiment on the
31st of October, 1793, lieutenant-colonel of Ward’s Regiment in
November, 1793, and lieutenant-colonel of Villette’s corps in
April, 1799; on the 1st of January, 1801, he was promoted to
the rank of colonel. He served in Sicily, under Major-General
Stuart,--was engaged in the invasion of Calabria, and had the honor
of commanding a brigade at the battle of Maida, on the 4th of July,
1806, when the superiority of British courage and discipline was
fully proved.

He was promoted to the rank of major-general in April, 1808, and
was subsequently placed on the staff of the army in the Peninsula,
where he commanded a division in numerous battles and skirmishes,
in which the reputation of the British arms was exalted, and the
enemies of England were overthrown by the superior prowess of the
British troops. He received the local rank of lieutenant-general
in Portugal and Spain in 1811,--the colonelcy of the One Hundred
and Third Regiment in 1812,--the rank of lieutenant-general in
1813,--and the colonelcy of the Seventieth Regiment in January,
1814. After taking a conspicuous part in delivering Portugal and
Spain from the power of the Emperor of France, he led his division
through the Pyrenees, and shared in the struggle for the liberties
of Europe, until the final overthrow of the power of Napoleon, and
the restoration of the Bourbon family to the throne of France. He
was rewarded with the honor of Knight Grand Cross of the Order
of the Bath, and received a cross and four clasps for commanding
a brigade at the battle of Maida, and a division at the battles
of Albuhera, Salamanca, Vittoria, Pyrenees, Nivelle, Orthes, and
Toulouse.

The Honorable Sir G. Lowry Cole, G.C.B., was nominated governor
of the Mauritius; in 1816 he was appointed colonel of the
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment, and in 1818 he obtained the government of
Gravesend and Tilbury Fort. He was removed to the Twenty-seventh
Regiment in 1826, and promoted to the rank of general in 1830. He
died at Highfield Park, Hartford Bridge, on the 5th of October,
1842.


SIR THOMAS MAKDOUGALL BRISBANE, BARONET, G.C.B., and G.C.H.

_Appointed 16th December, 1826._




SUCCESSION OF LIEUTENANT-COLONELS

OF THE

THIRTY-FOURTH, OR CUMBERLAND, REGIMENT.


  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+
  |       Names.        |   Dates of    |      Dates of Removal, &c.        |
  |                     |  Appointment. |                                   |
  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Thomas Dore         | Feb. 12, 1702 |                                   |
  | Thomas Garth        | March 24,1705 |                                   |
  | Richard Visct. Irwin| Jan. 11,      |                                   |
  |                     |       1714-15 |                                   |
  | Thomas Whitney      | July 22, 1715 |                                   |
  | James Paterson      | Jan. 20, 1731 | { Died on ____ and succeeded      |
  |                     |               | {   on December 15, 1738.         |
  | John Hely           | Dec. 15, 1738 |{ Died on ____ and succeeded       |
  |                     |               |{   on August 12, 1741.            |
  | Maurice Powell      | Aug. 12, 1741 | { Died on ____ and succeeded      |
  |                     |               | {   on February 17, 1745-6.       |
  | Charles Jeffreys    | Feb.17,1745-6 |{ Promoted to be colonel-commandant|
  |                     |               |{   of Sixty-second Foot,          |
  |                     |               |{   on February 17, 1745-6.        |
  | John Reed           | Jan.  7, 1756 | Retired on May 5, 1769.           |
  | Hezekiah Fleming    | April 27,1758 | { Removed to Seventy-third        |
  |                     |               | {   regiment, on April 27, 1758.  |
  | Samuel Townshend    | May   5, 1769 |{ Retired on half-pay on May       |
  |                     |               |{   20, 1775.                      |
  | Barry St. Leger     | May  20, 1775 | Retired on May 20, 1785.          |
  | Robert Hoyes        | May  20, 1785 | { Exchanged to half-pay Seventy-  |
  |                     |               | {   second regiment with          |
  |                     |               | {   Lieutenant-Colonel Hastings,  |
  |                     |               | {   on January 4, 1786.           |
  | Charles Hastings    | Jan.  4, 1786 |{ Placed on half-pay Sixty-fifth   |
  |                     |               |{   regiment, as captain, on       |
  |                     |               |{   November 11, 1789.             |
  | Aubrey Earl of      | Nov. 11, 1789 | Retired on October 22, 1794.      |
  |   Burford           |               |                                   |
  | Richd. Mark Dickens | Oct. 22, 1794 | Died on December 14, 1808.        |
  | Dennis Mil Woodward | Sep.  1, 1795 | Retired on November 23, 1796.     |
  | Francis Cuninghame  | Nov. 23, 1796 | { Exchanged into Second Foot      |
  |                     |               | {   Guards with Lieut.-Colonel    |
  |                     |               | {   Gascoyne, on January 24, 1799.|
  | Isaac Gascoyne      | Jan. 24, 1799 |{ Exchanged into Sixteenth         |
  |                     |               |{   Foot, on March 9, 1803, with   |
  |                     |               |{   Lieut.-Colonel Fancourt.       |
  | St. John Fancourt   | March 9, 1803 | Died in July, 1806.               |
  | David Parkhill      | Dec. 12, 1805 | Retired on August 20, 1807.       |
  | George Dodsworth    | July 10, 1806 | Died on May 17, 1809.             |
  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+

  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+
  | John Maister        | Aug. 20, 1807 | { Placed on half-pay June 25,     |
  |                     |               | {   1817, on the reduction of the |
  |                     |               | {   army.                         |
  | William Fenwick     | Dec. 15, 1808 | Retired on January 27, 1814.      |
  | Thomas Bradford     | May  18, 1809 | { Exchanged to Eighty-second      |
  |                     |               | {  regiment with Lieut.-Colonel   |
  |                     |               | {  McDonnell on December 21, 1809.|
  | Chichester McDonnell| Dec. 21, 1809 | Died on July 31, 1811.            |
  | William Thornton    | Aug.  1, 1811 | { Removed to Greek regiment       |
  |                     |               | {   of Light Infantry, on January |
  |                     |               | {   23, 1812.                     |
  | John M. Everard     | Jan. 23, 1812 |{ Exchanged to Seventy-seventh     |
  |                     |               |{   regiment with Lieut.-Colonel   |
  |                     |               |{   Dunkin, on March 5, 1818.      |
  | Henry Roberts       | Jan. 27, 1814 | Died on April 1, 1816.            |
  | Henry C. Dickens    | April 2, 1816 | Retired on October 28, 1824.      |
  | John H. Dunkin      | March 5, 1818 | { Placed on half-pay September    |
  |                     |               | {   26, 1823.                     |
  | Thomas Faunt        | Oct. 28, 1824 | Retired on June 28, 1827.         |
  | Colin Campbell      | June 28, 1827 | Retired May 8, 1828.              |
  | Henry R. Ferguson   | May   8, 1828 | { Exchanged to half-pay,          |
  |                     |               | {  unattached, with Lieut.-Colonel|
  |                     |               | {  Fox, on July 23, 1829.         |
  | Charles Richard Fox | July 23, 1829 |{ Removed to the Grenadier         |
  |                     |               |{   Guards on October 8, 1830.     |
  | Richard Kelly       | Oct.  8, 1830 | Retired on May 9, 1834.           |
  | Honorable Henry }   | May   9, 1834 | { Exchanged to half-pay,          |
  |   Sutton Fane   }   |               | {  unattached,on February 9, 1838,|
  |                     |               | {  with Lt.-Colonel Drummond.     |
  | W. C. Drummond      | Feb.  9, 1838 | Retired on February 10, 1838.     |
  | Richard Airey       | Feb. 10, 1838 | Now in command of the regiment.   |
  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+


SUCCESSION OF MAJORS

OF THE

THIRTY-FOURTH, OR CUMBERLAND, REGIMENT.

  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+
  |                     |   Dates of    |                                   |
  |      Names.         |  Appointment  |       Dates of Removal, &c.       |
  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+
  |                     |               |                                   |
  | Thomas Garth        | Before 1704   | Promoted March 24, 1705.          |
  | Robert Parsons      | Before 1708   |                                   |
  | Richard Coles       | Before 1708   |                                   |
  | Michaell Fleming    | Jan. 11,      |                                   |
  |                     |    1714-15    |                                   |
  | Charles Douglas     | July 22, 1715 |                                   |
  | John Hely           | May  12, 1731 | Promoted December 15, 1738.       |
  | Maurice Powell      | Dec. 15, 1738 | Promoted August 12, 1741.         |
  | Michael Studholm    | April 21, 1743| Retired on October 25, 1744.      |
  | Henry Hart          | March 3, 1750 | { Lieut.-Governor of Sheerness.   |
  |                     |               | {   Resigned his majority in      |
  |                     |               | {   THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment,       |
  |                     |               | {   February 2, 1757.             |
  | John Dundas         | Feb.  2, 1757 | Retired February 28, 1759.        |
  | Hezekiah Fleming    | Sep.  5, 1756 | Promoted April 27, 1758.          |
  | Thomas Shirley      | Feb. 28, 1759 | { Promoted to Sixty-seventh       |
  |                     |               | {   regiment, on June 2, 1761.    |
  | Robert Farmar       | June  2, 1761 | Retired on November 23, 1768.     |
  | William Ogle        | Nov. 23, 1768 | { Exchanged to half-pay with      |
  |                     |               | {   Major Brownrigg, on September |
  |                     |               | {   7, 1771.                      |
  | Henry Brownrigg     | Sep.  7, 1771 | Retired on November 28, 1771.     |
  | John Lind           | Nov. 28, 1771 | { Promoted to Twentieth regiment, |
  |                     |               | {   on January 6, 1776.           |
  | Alexander Dundas    | Jan.  6, 1776 |{ Promoted to Eighth Foot, on      |
  |                     |               |{   November 1, 1780.              |
  | Robert Hoyes        | Nov.  1, 1780 | Promoted on May 20, 1785.         |
  | John Ross           | May  20, 1785 | Retired on February 17, 1789.     |
  | Aubrey, Earl of }   | Feb. 17, 1789 | { Promoted on November 11,        |
  |   Burford       }   |               | {   1789.                         |
  | William Ancram      | Nov. 11, 1789 | Retired July 25, 1792.            |
  | Robert Wood         | July 25, 1792 | Retired November 22, 1797.        |
  | Francis Cuninghame  | Sep.  1, 1795 | Promoted on November 23, 1796.    |
  | George Dodsworth    | Nov. 23, 1796 | Promoted on July 10, 1806.        |
  | George Anderson     | Nov. 22, 1797 | Retired on May 9, 1800.           |
  | Robert Gordon       | May   9, 1800 | Retired on July 17, 1806.         |
  | William Fenwick     | May  15, 1805 | Promoted on December 15, 1808.    |
  | John Bromhead       | May  16, 1806 |{ Promoted to Seventy-seventh      |
  |                     |               |{   regiment, on August 3, 1809.   |
  | Richard Diggens     | July 17, 1806 | { Exchanged into Eleventh         |
  |                     |               | {   Light Dragoons, with Major    |
  |                     |               | {   Browne, on August 14, 1806.   |
  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+

  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+
  | Thomas Browne       | Aug. 14, 1806 | { Exchanged to half-pay Ninth     |
  |                     |               | {   Foot, with Lieut.-Colonel     |
  |                     |               | {   Bodkin, on October 16, 1806.  |
  | Thomas Bodkin       | Oct. 16, 1806 | Retired on July 10, 1806.         |
  | John M. Everard     | July 10, 1806 | Promoted on January 23, 1812.     |
  | James Tomlinson }   | April 30,1807 | Retired on February 1, 1810.      |
  |   Terrewest     }   |               |                                   |
  | Henry Roberts       | Jan. 19, 1809 | Promoted on January 27, 1814.     |
  | Henry C. Dickens    | June 26, 1809 | Promoted on April 2, 1816.        |
  | Walter Hovenden     | Feb.  1, 1810 | Retired on March 26, 1812.        |
  | Henry Worsley       | Jan. 23, 1812 |  { Died at Newport, Isle of Wight,|
  |                     |               |  {   on May 13, 1820.             |
  | George Edwd. Pratt }| March 26,1812 | { Promoted to Sixty-first         |
  |   Barlow           }|               | {   regiment, on December 4, 1823.|
  | Jas. Harrison Baker | March 10,1814 | Died on April 11, 1814.           |
  | Chas. Ramus Forrest | June  2, 1814 | { Placed on half-pay, on June     |
  |                     |               | {   25, 1817, upon the reduction  |
  |                     |               | {   of the army.                  |
  | Thomas Faunt        | May  25, 1820 | Promoted October 28, 1824.        |
  | Edward Broderick    | Dec.  4, 1823 | Retired on December 18, 1828.     |
  | Timothy Davies      | Oct. 28, 1824 | { Exchanged to half-pay,          |
  |                     |               | {  unattached, with Major         |
  |                     |               | {  Ferguson, on December 28, 1826.|
  | Henry R. Ferguson   | Dec. 28, 1826 | Promoted May 8, 1828.             |
  | Richard Greaves     | May   8, 1828 | { Exchanged to half-pay,          |
  |                     |               | {   unattached with Major Tew, on |
  |                     |               | {   January 21, 1837.             |
  | Honorable Henry }   | Dec. 18, 1828 | Promoted on May 9, 1834.          |
  |   Sutton Fane   }   |               |                                   |
  | Richard Airey       | May   9, 1834 | Promoted on February 10, 1838.    |
  | Mark M’Leod Tew     | Jan. 21, 1837 | Retired on August 4, 1837.        |
  | George Ruxton       | Aug.  4, 1837 | { Exchanged to half-pay,          |
  |                     |               | {   unattached, with Major Ogilvy,|
  |                     |               | {   on August 20, 1841.           |
  | Henry Deedes        | Feb. 23, 1838 | Now serving with the regiment.    |
  | Walter Ogilvy       | Aug. 20, 1841 | Retired August 20, 1841.          |
  | Charles Baillie }   | Aug. 20, 1841 | { Exchanged to half-pay,          |
  |   Brisbane      }   |               | {   unattached, with              |
  |                     |               | {   Brevet-Lieut.-Colonel Mair,   |
  |                     |               | {   on December 13, 1842.         |
  | Cornelius Cuyler }  | Dec. 13, 1842 | Retired December 13, 1842.        |
  |   P. Mair        }  |               |                                   |
  | James John Best     | Dec. 13, 1842 | Now serving with the regiment.    |
  +---------------------+---------------+-----------------------------------+


LONDON: HARRISON AND CO., PRINTERS, ST. MARTIN’S LANE.




REVIEW OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH REGIMENT,

AT DUBLIN,

ON THE 21st OF JUNE, 1844.


GENERAL SIR THOMAS MAKDOUGALL BRISBANE, Bart., G.C.B. and G.C.H.,
having arrived in Dublin from his seat, Makerstoun, near Kelso,
reviewed this regiment (of which he is Colonel) in Richmond
Barracks. After having received the general salute, he proceeded
down the line, making a most minute inspection, and marking out and
questioning every old soldier in the corps. The regiment then went
through various movements, and concluded by forming square, when
the General addressed the men in a most soldier-like and impressive
manner, stating, that through a very long period of service, it had
been his duty to inspect many Corps, and that he could safely aver
that he had never seen one in better order, or in a higher state of
discipline, than the THIRTY-FOURTH. He adverted to the importance
of sobriety, and the advantages of education, as the means of any
one belonging to the regiment attaining the rank which he himself
held, instances of which, the General observed, were afforded by
the British Army. He concluded by expressing his wish, that in
order to commemorate his visit to the regiment, all prisoners, not
under sentence of Courts Martial, might be allowed to return to
their duty without further punishment.

Upon the regiment being dismissed, the men proceeded to their
Barrack-room, where a most excellent dinner, including everything
except spirits, had been prepared, at the expense of Sir Thomas
Brisbane, for the whole of the non-commissioned officers, privates,
women, and children, in the corps. During the repast the messes
were visited by the General in person It is needless to observe, he
was received with the most marked enthusiasm. He afterwards saw the
Hospital, and the Boys and Girls’ School, with which he expressed
himself much pleased.

General Sir Thomas M. Brisbane, during his stay in Dublin, attended
several of the garrison field-days, consisting of three regiments
of cavalry, five regiments of infantry, and two troops of horse
artillery. The gallant General, as well as the Lord Lieutenant,
and Sir Edward Blakeney, the Commander-in-Chief, who were present,
expressed their warmest satisfaction at the manner in which the
troops performed their various movements. The fine appearance of
the THIRTY-FOURTH in particular was highly extolled. On one of
these occasions, General Sir Thomas Brisbane, at the express desire
of Sir Edward Blakeney, had the honour to receive a salute from the
whole of the troops under arms.

The following is the effective strength of the
regiment:--Head-Quarters, Dublin, under the command of
Lieutenant-Colonel Airey. Total Effectives,--1 Lieutenant-Colonel,
1 Major, 10 Captains, 10 Lieutenants, 7 Ensigns, 5 Staff, 47
Serjeants, 14 Drummers, 788 rank and file.


LIST OF OFFICERS OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH REGIMENT, _On the 21st of
June, 1844_.

  Lieut.-Colonel Richard Airey.
  Major H. Deedes.
  Captain R. W. Byron.
     ”    N. R. Brown.
     ”    J. H. Mathews.
     ”    E. Heathcote.
     ”    H. J. Hutton.
     ”    R. D. Kelly.
     ”    A. C. Goodenough.
     ”    F. H. Lang.
     ”    Jno. Simpson.
     ”    C. A. Schreiber.

  Lieutenant C. F. Hervey.
      ”      T. Bourke.
      ”      J. Gwilt.
      ”      A. C. Robertson.
      ”      F. C. Harvey.
      ”      J. T. Still.
      ”      R. C. Packe.
      ”      T. A. M. Brisbane.
      ”      James Maxwell.
      ”      H. H. Oxley.
      ”      W. L. Talbot.
      ”      E. F. Agnew.

  Ensign E. W. Sitwell.
    ”    C. W. G. Burrill.
    ”    C. W. Randolph.
    ”    D. M. Fyfe.
    ”    Sir Geo. Douglas, Bt.
    ”    M. G. Best.
    ”    W. Warry.
    ”    Jno. Robinson.

  Paymaster C. B. Roche.
  Adjutant E. Talbot.
  Surgeon Wm. Bain.
  Assistant Surgeon R. W. Fraser.




GRAND MILITARY BANQUET

TO THE

OFFICERS OF THE THIRTY-FOURTH REGIMENT,

AT DUBLIN.


GENERAL SIR THOMAS MAKDOUGALL BRISBANE, Bart., gave a magnificent
entertainment at Morrisson’s Hotel, Dublin, on Tuesday evening, the
25th June, 1844, to the Officers of the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment,
of which corps the gallant General is Colonel. Every delicacy in
season, and every variety of the choicest wines were supplied in
profusion. The distinguished entertainer, and his guests, were
pleased to express themselves in the highest terms of the entire
arrangements made by Mr. Baker for the occasion. The fine band of
the regiment played during the evening some of the newest and most
admired pieces of music.

After the health of Her Majesty had been drunk,

Sir Thomas gave the health of Colonel Airey and the Officers of
the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment. In introducing the toast, the gallant
General spoke nearly as follows:--Colonel Airey and Officers of the
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment,--I beg most unfeignedly to assure you, that
this is a most gratifying occasion to me; and I have looked forward
to it with the greatest pleasure. Ever since the regiment returned
from foreign service, I have been most anxious to meet with the
Officers of so gallant a corps, which has distinguished itself on
every occasion, and in various quarters of the globe; although I
never had the good fortune to have the regiment immediately under
my command, yet I have fought with it in many of the same battles.
Even as far back as 1796, I fought with it at the capture of the
island of St. Lucia. I also served with it in the Peninsula, and
in all the battles which they proudly bear upon their colours,
with the exception of Albuhera. We fought together at Vittoria,
the Pyrenees, Nivelle, Nive, and Orthes; and I consider that the
regiment ought to have had Toulouse added to the others, and
I regret that the high authorities decided otherwise. But the
THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment occupied a most important situation during
that action, of which I was an eye-witness, being the nearest
division to that of Lord Hill’s; and the returns of the killed and
wounded on these various occasions, amounting to nearly 1800 men,
proclaim that the regiment had borne the brunt of many a severe
and hard-fought battle. I assure you, gentlemen, it is a source
of great gratification to me that I have been enabled to record
all these gallant deeds, and more particularly that of Arroya
de Molinos. In that brilliant affair the THIRTY-FOURTH Regiment
took the French Thirty-fourth Regiment prisoners, together with
its brass drum, and Drum-Major’s Staff, &c.; and in consequence,
the gallant corps to which you belong is permitted to enjoy a
distinction that has fallen to the lot of no other regiment--that
of wearing the white and red tufts in their caps. But this and the
other heroic deeds will be imperishably recorded in the History of
the Regiment, a copy of which I intend to present to every Officer,
and also some copies to the library, that when any officer or
soldier joins the regiment, he may, on reading all these gallant
exploits, be animated with the desire of upholding that _esprit
de corps_ which has happily ever subsisted in the regiment, and
which I hope will ever continue. I cannot here omit to notice how
much we are indebted to Mr. Cannon, of the Adjutant-General’s
Office, for the pains and labour he has bestowed, to enable us
to print these records, and to give a faithful detail of all our
early operations, deduced from the most authentic sources. Next
to the bravery before the enemy, I admire the conduct which has
marked the regiment, wherever it has been quartered; and it is
with a feeling of pride I say, that in every place in which it
has been, both Officers and men have left with the high opinion
of the inhabitants. Gentlemen, I assure you this visit associates
itself with many remote and pleasing recollections, as I consider
myself one of the few connecting links left which unite the army
of the last century with that of the present; and I am happy to
think, in drawing a parallel betwixt the two, the contrast is all
in favour of the latter. In the first place, we are now a much more
scientific army; next, we are an infinitely better educated body,
and much more sober, as relates both to Officers and soldiers; and
thirdly, as to our movements,--When I first joined the army, there
was no officer to be found in a regiment who could give a sketch
of a country, or delineate a position; now, in consequence of the
establishment at Sandhurst, there are few regiments without several
of the officers who are qualified, not only to give a sketch of a
country, or delineate a position, but to construct field-works,
or to undertake the siege if necessary. With regard to education,
it was then difficult to find even a serjeant who could read and
write, or keep accounts; whereas, now, almost every soldier in a
regiment is so far educated, and there are 700 out of the 800 men
of which the THIRTY-FOURTH is composed, who can read and write.
The period that I allude to was when I was quartered in this city,
in 1792 and a part of 1793. Dundas’s system was then introduced
into the service. Before that time no uniformity existed in our
military movements, nor even in the words of command; for if an
officer was sent from one regiment to another, he would not have
understood them, since regiments moved according to the fancy of
their respective commanding officers. Now, as the THIRTY-FOURTH,
about the time I am speaking of, had been long in America, its
movements were principally those of light troops; and a favourite
one was that of moving from the centre and flanks of companies
by files. I have had the advantage of serving in the first and
second campaigns of the war with the Austrian and Prussian armies;
and I may say I have seen almost the whole of the European armies
in motion upon a large scale; and I consider that the British,
in point of quickness and accuracy, stands foremost; and nobody
will doubt that their physical strength and moral courage are
superior to that of any other nation. It is all one to the British
soldier where his enemy may be,--whether in his front, flanks, or
rear,--he will fight him as long as his officer orders him, as at
Waterloo, where whole faces of the squares were swept away with
round shot, still the British soldier was found immovable. And
although you may characterise the British soldier as the lion in
the field, yet the most noble of all his traits, according to my
estimation, is his humanity after a battle, when the lion suddenly
changes to the lamb; and I never saw an instance in all my service
in which the British soldier committed an act of cruelty upon his
fallen enemy[17]. Next to the British soldier, I consider the
Russian the most formidable while placed in position, although he
cannot move[18]; and I may instance the fact in support of this,
that at the battle of Borodino, the redoubts were five times taken
by the French, and as often retaken by the Russians. Napoleon,
finding he could make no impression on their iron front, made a
flank movement with his army during the night, and got betwixt them
and Moscow. It is too much the idea amongst the continental armies,
that if their centre is pierced, or their flanks are turned, the
battle is lost, as at the unfortunate battle of Jena, which the
Prussians lost, and which decided the fate of their country. The
same may be said with regard to the Austrians, at the battles
of Wagram and Asperne, which led to the occupation of Vienna by
the French, and to peace. How widely different with the British
soldier! While in Paris, in the year 1815, I had many conversations
with French officers of high rank, who argued strongly, that by
all the laws of war, the English had lost the Battle of Waterloo,
as their centre had been pierced, their flanks turned, and their
artillery were in possession of the French. Could these gentlemen
have possibly paid a higher compliment to the British army,
although they wished to turn that compliment to their own account.
When Napoleon saw the English army drawn up in position for the
Battle of Waterloo, he remarked to Marshal Soult, “There are the
English, I have got them at last, and I think it is nine chances
out of ten that I have them all before night.” The Marshal, who had
had a great deal of experience of the English, while opposed to
them in Spain and in the South of France, replied to the Emperor,
“Your Majesty certainly sees the English army, but you will find
them like trees, rivetted to the ground.” I may here mention, in
confirmation of this, that when the Kremlin was re-occupied by
the Russians, the portfolio of Berthier, the War Minister, was
found, giving a return of the French army in Russia, amounting
to 400,000 infantry, and 80,000 cavalry. There were also found
secret reports from the French Marshals opposed to the English in
Spain, and addressed to Napoleon himself, stating that the French
army could not be got to withstand the English when they came in
close quarters! I have been long anxious to get the regiment to
come to Scotland, that I might have an opportunity of uniting the
bond of friendship and good understanding with myself and with the
Officers more closely, and particularly as it is now ninety-eight
years since it was in that country. In the year 1746, the regiment
fought at the Battle of Culloden, and by a singular and rather
extraordinary coincidence, my father fought with it in that action
as _Aide-de-Camp_ to the Earl of Home. I felt exceedingly gratified
in examining into the interior economy of the regiment, to find
that it is perfect and complete, both as to barracks, hospitals,
and school; and I regret that my right honourable friend, Sir
Edward Blakeney, the Commander-in-Chief, is not here to receive
the report, as also in reference to its movements in the field:
It is impossible for me to express too high an opinion of Colonel
Airey, and the hearty co-operation he must have received from his
officers to have enabled him to have brought the regiment to its
present state of perfection; he could only have accomplished it by
establishing a chain of responsibility throughout all ranks, where
every individual discharged his proper duty, and to which we may
ascribe the brilliant victories we always obtained under our
great and invincible leader, who strictly enforced this amongst
all ranks of his army, and which enabled him to declare to me his
conviction, after the battle of Toulouse, when the army was about
to be broken up, that he had commanded the most perfect army that
ever was in existence. In conclusion, I fear I have occupied a good
deal of your time, but I was anxious that you should hear many of
these important military facts, from an individual who has passed
above fifty years in the service, and who, in following up his
profession, has crossed the tropics twelve times, the equinoxial
line twice, and circumnavigated the globe, besides having been in
America and other parts of the world.

      “Quæque ipse miserrima vidi,
      Et quorum pars magna fui.”

Colonel Airey, in reply to the toast, took occasion to remark, that
it was owing entirely to the hearty co-operation and assistance
he had derived from every officer in the regiment, he had been
enabled to bring it to the state of perfection in which the gallant
General, who was then Colonel, had found it.

Many other toasts were afterwards given, and the meeting broke up
at a late hour, but not before health and long life to Sir Thomas
had been drunk with at least nine times nine in the most cordial
manner.


FOOTNOTES:

[17] There is no parallel in history of an army like the English
marching through the South of France, then an enemy’s country,
observing such rigid discipline and order that everything was paid
for as scrupulously as if it had been in England; and that even the
French officers and soldiers told the inhabitants not to quit their
houses on the absence of the English army, as they had nothing to
fear. I may be induced to make this remark, as none of the authors
who have written on these campaigns have sufficiently dwelt on
this important feature of the British army. It is a fact, that
commissaries were left behind to pay for every article consumed by
our army.

[18] In confirmation of this it may be mentioned, that when the
late Emperor Alexander of Russia gave a grand review to the Duke of
Wellington, at Vertus, about eighty miles from Paris, of 130,000
Russians, picquets were driven into the ground at every wheeling
point. How widely different are the movements of the British army!
Some time afterwards, when the whole army under the command of
his Grace were reviewed in presence of the allied Sovereigns,
Field-Marshals, and Commanders, he moved the whole of his forces
from the position they had taken, to nearly a quarter of a mile
in the rear, no doubt with the view of showing that there were no
picquets driven into the ground to direct the movements of the
troops.




  TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE

  The roman page numbering at the front of the book goes from i to xix,
  then from v to viii; this has not been changed.

  Several illustrations have a printer’s note in the caption that says
  “(To face page n)”; this page number n is sometimes incorrect but has
  not been changed.

  Obvious typographical errors and punctuation errors have been
  corrected after careful comparison with other occurrences within
  the text and consultation of external sources.

  Except for those changes noted below, all misspellings in the text,
  and inconsistent or archaic usage, have been retained.

  Pg v: ‘Returns to England   5’ replaced by ‘Returns to England   15’.
  Pg viii: Entries for the first two Plate illustrations in the book have
  been inserted in the list of Plates.
  Pg viii: ‘Colours and Uniform of Officers’ replaced by ‘Uniform
  of Officers’.
  Pg 41: ‘sland of St.’ replaced by ‘island of St.’.
  Pg 63: ‘to Bourdeaux,’ replaced by ‘to Bordeaux,’.
  Pg 89: blank space for a missing date replaced by ‘____’.
  Pg 98 Footnote 17: ‘as scruulously as’ replaced by ‘as scrupulously as’.
  Pg 100: ‘the the brilliant’ replaced by ‘the brilliant’.
  Pg 100: ‘had been drank’ replaced by ‘had been drunk’.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL RECORD OF THE
THIRTY-FOURTH, OR THE CUMBERLAND REGIMENT OF FOOT : CONTAINING AN ACCOUNT
OF THE FORMATION OF THE REGIMENT IN 1702 AND OF ITS SUBSEQUENT SERVICES TO
1844 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
